AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
CITATION: FLETCHER AND RSPCA [2007] ACTDT 5 (19 JUNE 2007)
DT 07/1
Catchwords: Discrimination in provision of goods and services – sexual harassment – strike out
application – inferences to be drawn from evidence.
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Discrimination Act 1991 ss 79, 81(1), (2)(a),
Post November 2006 ss 7, 58(1), 62, 79, 93, 108
Firestone and Legal Aid Office (ACT) [2006] ACTDT 3
State Electricity Commission –v- Rabel & Ors [1997] EOC 92/875
Lucy Cooper and ACT Housing (DT 03/18 dated 22 June 2004)
Jones –v- Great Western Railway Co [1930] 144 LT 194
Legal Aid Commissioner (ACT) & Ors –v- Grundy [1999] ACTSC 318
Tribunal: Mr G C Lalor, Deputy President Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Date: 19 June 2007
AustLII AustLI
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY ) DT 07/1
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL )
RE: GRAHAM FLETCHER
Complainant
AND: RSPCA
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Respondent
ORDER
Tribunal : Mr G C Lalor, Deputy President
Date : 19 June 2007
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS that pursuant to section 79 of the Discrimination Act 1991 the
complaint be struck out on the ground that it lacks substance.
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
…………………
Deputy President
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY ) AustLII AustLI istLI AustLII AustLI
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL ) NO: DT07/01
RE: GRAHAM FLETCHER
Complainant
AND: RSPCA
Respondent
REASONS
19 June 2007 +LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Mr G C Lalor, Deputy President
1. On 30 May 2006 the complainant complained to the Human Rights Office of the Australian
Capital Territory of discrimination against him on the grounds of disability, relationship
status, religious conviction and sex in the areas of “access to premises”, “provision of
goods, services or facilities” and “a request for information”. Further, the complainant
alleged sexual harassment by a member of the respondent’s staff.
2. Following a lengthy investigative period during which both parties were given the opportunity
to fully make representations to the Commissioner, she declined the complaint as lacking
substance in accord with subsections 81(1) and (2)(a) of the ACT Discrimination Act 1991
(the Act) as they then were. The Commissioner made this decision on 31 July 2006.
3. Exercising his statutory right, the complainant, following this decision, by letter dated 23
August 2006 requested the Commissioner to refer his complaint to the Discrimination
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Tribunal. The papers were received by the Tribunal on 12 January 2007.
4. On 31 January 2007 directions were given in the matter and one such was that the
complainant was to file a statement with the Tribunal by 4pm 23 February 2007 setting out
the person it was alleged treated him unfavourably, the nature of that alleged unfavourable
treatment, the date on which it occurred and the grounds of the alleged discrimination.
Further, it was directed that the complainant file by 4pm 23 February 2007 a statement of
any witness on which he sought to rely at the hearing of the matter, a list of documents
sought to be relied upon including documents forwarded to the Tribunal from the
Commissioner and any other material on which he wished to rely. The matter was listed for
further Directions on 30 April 2007 with a view to setting a hearing date for the matter.
5. By application dated 26 March 2007 the respondent to the original application filed an
application for orders that the Complaint be struck out by this Tribunal pursuant to Section
79 of the Discrimination Act 1991. That Section provides:
“The person against whom a complaint is made may, at any time after the AustLII AustLI istLI AustLII AustLI
complaint is referred to the Tribunal and before the Tribunal begins hearing
the complaint (other than a time when the complaint is being conciliated under
the HRC Act), apply to the Tribunal to strike out the complaint on any of the
following grounds:
(a) the complaint is frivolous, vexatious or not made honestly;
(b) the complaint lacks substance.”
6. This application was lodged prior to a date being set for the hearing and so is filed within the
time set by the Act.
7. On 10 April a further Directions Hearing was held and the application was adjourned to 15
June 2007 at 10am and a direction was given that the respondent to this application under
Section 79 of the Act be served with a copy of the application and the affidavit supporting
the application prior to his leaving the Court precincts. The Directions date of 30 April was
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! vacated pending the hearing of this application.
8. The complainant has made several applications to the Tribunal for orders pending the
hearing of the substantive issues of his complaint. The Commissioner when referring the
complaint to the Tribunal under the provisions of the Act forwards a copy of all the
documents in her possession which she used in her deliberations to the Tribunal. These
documents are those filed by the complainant and the respondent and the correspondence
between the Commissioner and the parties. The Tribunal then invited the parties to inspect
these documents and copy any that is not held by them. The complainant objects to having
this inspection in the presence of a Tribunal staff member and has demanded a copy of the
documents be forwarded to him. That demand has, not unreasonably, been refused.
9. The complainant then sought an order that the registry staff not communicate with him in
such a way that their conversations with him might be overheard. He sought this order
initially under Section 108 of the Act as it was before the amendments that became effective
from 1 November 2006. That section prohibited the publication of evidence given before
the Tribunal or the publication of the contents of a document produced to the Tribunal or the Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
publication of information that might lead to the identification of a party who has appeared
before the Commissioner or the Tribunal. That application was refused on the papers as it
was not competent.
10. The complainant then made further application under Section 93 of the Act which has the
same effective provisions as the repealed Section 108 as outlined above. Again, I declined
to make the orders sought as the application was not competent and without foundation.
11. The complainant made a further application dated 5 March 2007 for orders pursuant to
Section 93 of the Act on the basis of victimization as he was being approached by strangers
in various locations in the Australian Capital Territory who, as he alleged, appeared not only
to know of his application before the tribunal but also of the contents. Again I declined to
make any orders sought but made an order that no further application was to be received
pursuant to Section 93 of the Act without leave of the Tribunal. The applications had, in my
view, been unmeritorious and frivolous.
istLI AustLII AustLI
AustLII AustLI
12. Another matter that I should mention is that at the Directions Hearing on 10 April 2007 I
observed the complainant to have a tape recorder sitting on the table in front of him. I
asked him whether it was operating and he said that it was. I advised him that I would refer
the matter to the Australian Federal Police for investigation as it was my view that he may
have committed an offence in doing so. I did so.
13. Danyel Andrew Kynaston, a solicitor in this Territory, affirmed that following the making of
orders at the Directions Hearing of 31 January the complainant filed a document on or about
19 February with the Tribunal which it is said does not comply with the directions given.
Further it is then alleged that the documents lodged fail to disclose “a seriously arguable
cause of action against the respondent”.
14. I set out the documents filed by the complainant in response to the Directions of 31 January
2007:
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Response to Directions
(a) Ms Lyndal Keen, Ms Karen Hewston, Bon, I believe it was, Ms Lorraine
Hamilton and Mr Michael Linke.
(b) Undue harassment from RSPCA staff, discounting and ignoring most of what I
said, experienced and informed comment discounted and ignored mostly,
failing to answer any questions, failing to appreciate the “companion dog”
relationship that caused me to try and purchase Floyd, little respect shown to
me and personal and private aspects treated as “need to know” by RSPCA
staff, management at RSPCA failed to adopt reasonable current acceptable
standards of practice. Location RSPCA site Weston ACT on both days
26/5/06 and 29/5/06.
(c) Provision of goods services and facilities, requests from me for information.
(d) sex, disability, relationship status, religious conviction
(e sex, relationship status, religious or political conviction, disability (Sections
7,8,20,23,58, 62, 68) poss 19 Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Statement from complainant
(a) With reference to the letter of reply from RSPCA to HRO dated 19/9/06 written by
M Linke (CEO) and my complaint document to HRO dated 30/5/06 and
attachments 2-4 with 19/9/06 letter. There are two references of significance on
page 2 and page 4 of RSPCA letter of 19/9/06 where attempts are made to deal
with the reasons RSPCA used to refuse me the purchase of dog Floyd on 29/8/06.
Page 2: Reference to backyard inspection by RSPCA staff. At no time did I advise
any person at RSPCA on 26/5/06 or 29/5/06 of any problems with my yard security. I
informed them fences etc were replaced and are sound and yard is secure including
locked gates.
Page 4: No information provided to Ms Hewston on 29/5/06 or any other person, AustLII AustLI istLI AustLII AustLI
could have caused any reasonable person to raise the “lack of any outdoor shelter” for
my dogs use, as in any way relevant, as it was advised 24 hour to and from access to
my house was able to be achieved through a ‘dog door’ in the main door to the back
yard and if I am away a boarding kennel is where the dog stays. I advised the correct
and state of repair and security of my yard to be used to allow my dog to go into from
the house and stay in as long as needed each day.
However, Ms Hewston was not interested in the details I had offered her and was
totally unconvincing when she asserted all back yards were inspected (as past
experience of mine with dog purchase from RSPCA) indicated was not true and other
persons I know have had experiences where backyards were not inspected and her
agreeing to a viewing from the boundary changed after some time to being necessary
for her to check each individual fence paling. She was totally unconvincing as to her
need to visit or why she thought it was necessary.
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
I was not offered any dog training as I believe Ms Hewston was a dog trainer at
RSPCA some years ago and when I purchased a dog there then (without all the
drama) I paid for dog training (app $95 I believe) at time of purchase but months
later was given a refund as no training was ever arranged. Almost all the comments
made in the RSPCA letter of 19/6/06 from M Linke to HRO are inaccurate or never
occurred, where attributed to me, and references to my behaviour attitude and person
are also inaccurate/false. What I allegedly said and how it was said are all concocted,
intended to deceive. While it is probably true RSPCA was provided a set of records
that usually are used as part of their standard procedure for pet adoption, standard
procedure as ‘they’ now indicate it to be did not occur in my case.
Details of attachments 2-4 (1 not their product)
Attachment 2 I was not provided with or had any input to the production of that
document in the office on 29/5/06.
Attach 3: I was never provided with that document
Attach 4 Papers Ms Hewston held and appeared to write on at times during the
interview on 29/5/06 were torn up in my presence after she rejected my purchase of Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
the dog.
I felt I was being sexually harassed on both my visits on 26/5/06 and 29/5/06 through
the first leading into the subject by referring to dogs sexuality then getting more
specific when relating to me.”
15. The principles to be applied in determining whether a matter referred to the Tribunal should AustLII AustLI istLI AustLII AustLI
be struck out are set out in the Tribunal’s decision of 25 October 2006 in the matter of
Firestone and Legal Aid Office (ACT) [2006] ACTDT 3 when the Deputy President, Mr
M H Peedom said
“10. … In determining whether a complaint should be struck out pursuant to
section 89 of the Act, the Tribunal ordinarily accepts that it should be assumed
that the factual allegations relied on by the complainant are true and such
inferences in favour of the complainant as are open should be drawn. If,
however, it is clear beyond doubt that the complainant has no arguable case
which should be allowed to be resolved at a full hearing, a complaint may be
dismissed as lacking in substance (see State Electricity Commission v Rabel &
Ors [1997] EOC 92/875).
11. The power to dismiss a claim as without substance is required to be exercised
with considerable caution (see Clean Ocean Foundation v Environment Protection
Authority (2003) 20 VAR 227 at 230-231. See also Lucy Cooper and ACT
AustLII AUstNI AustLII Aust! Housing (DT 03/18 dated 22 June 2004)).”
16. I assume for the purposes of this application by the respondent that the factual allegations
made by the complainant are true. In doing so I make no finding as to the truth of the
inferences he draws from those facts. I must then draw inferences in favour of the
tLI complainant from those established facts.
17. The complainant has asked that the Tribunal draw inferences and make findings that the
respondent has discriminated against him in its refusal to allow him to purchase a dog named
Floyd on the basis of his disability, relationship status, religious conviction and sex. Those
grounds are contained within the range of grounds covered by the Act as set out in Section
7. In his original application to the Commissioner he set out details of his allegations. He
said that the disability for which he was treated unfavourably was a mobility restriction, the
relationship status that formed the basis of his unfavourable treatment was
“single/divorced”, the religious conviction he possessed was “humanist” and the further
allegation for the unfavourable treatment was his sex.
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
18. The complainant/respondent on the hearing of this application before me accepted that
nowhere in the documents forwarded to the Tribunal by the Commissioner or in his
statement filed on 19 February 2007 has he addressed the question of a physical disability
he possesses, having a mobility restriction. He submitted that it was obvious from his
physical appearance that he possessed this disability and he asked that the Tribunal draw an
inference that this formed part of the reason he was refused the right to purchase a dog from
the respondent/applicant.
19. Similarly there was no evidence before the Tribunal in any manner that the fact of his marital
status was known to the respondent/applicant. The complainant/respondent submitted that
he was known to the staff of the RSPCA, having previously purchased a dog from it. He
said that the documents furnished to the Commissioner and ultimately to the Tribunal were
concocted and false, having been prepared following his complaint to the Commissioner.
This allegation is serious, bearing not only on the integrity of the people concerned, but
alleges a possible criminal offence. The allegation is also contained in the document filed on
19 February 2007. Even allowing that this allegation is correct, there is no evidence to AustLII AustLI istLI AustLII AustLI
support the contention that the respondent/applicant reached its decision as alleged.
20. In so far as the allegation that the complainant/respondent was treated unfavourably because
of his religious conviction, he asserted in his original application and adhered to it before me
that his religion was “humanist”. I am of the view that this is not a religion as defined within
the Act. Humanism is a philosophy which is found in some religions but of itself is not a
religion. Section 7 of the Act provides that it applies to “discrimination on the ground of
any of the following attributes”, one such being “religious or political conviction”. The
complainant/respondent agreed in submission that humanism was in fact a philosophic tenet.
There is no definition of “religious conviction” under the Act. In the documentation it is
alleged that the staff at the RSPCA were aware that he was a non-Catholic and that that
organization was a “catholic front group” and that a staff member was “not pleased with
my lack of interest in particularly some Catholics and Catholic establishments”.
There is no evidence before the Tribunal to support this assertion.
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
21. The complainant/respondent has also alleged that he suffered sexual harassment at the hand
of the RSPCA staff. Pursuant to Section 62 of the Act:
“it is unlawful for a person to subject another person to sexual harassment in
the course of providing, or offering to provide, goods, services or facilities to
the other person”.
22. Section 58(1) of the Act provides:
“a person subjects someone else to sexual harassment if the person makes an
unwelcome sexual advance, or an unwelcome request for sexual favours, to
the other person or engages in other unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature in
circumstances in which the other person reasonably feels offended, humiliated
or intimidated”.
23. There is no evidence in any documentation before the Tribunal that the staff of the RSPCA
have done anything to bring them within the purview of section 62 of the Act.
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
24. In his submission the complainant/respondent has, as I have said, asked that the Tribunal
draw inferences favourable to him from the statements provided by the Commissioner and
further documents filed by him. Those inferences, he submitted, would lead the Tribunal to
find that he had been treated unfavourably because of the designated attributes taken from
Section 7 of the Act as set out in his original application to the Commissioner.
25. The distinction between conjecture and inference is often difficult to draw as was said by
Lord McMillan in Jones –v- Great Western Railway Co [1930] 144 LT 194:
“The dividing line between conjecture and inference is often a very difficult
one to draw. A conjecture may be plausible, but is of no legal value, for its
essence is that it is a mere guess. An inference in the legal sense, on the other
hand, is a deduction from the evidence, and if it is a reasonable deduction it
may have the validity of legal proof.”
26. I am of the view that to do what the complainant/respondent seeks the Tribunal to do would AustLII AustLI istLI AustLII AustLI
not be to draw inferences but to enter the realm of conjecture. There is no credible
evidence from which appropriate inferences might be drawn to support his complaint.
27. The applicant/respondent has sought to have the complainant’s application struck out
pursuant to Section 79 of the Act and submits that in order for the complaint to proceed any
further there must be some evidence favourable to his complaint which would, taken at its
highest would render it seriously arguable – Legal Aid Commissioner (ACT) & Ors –v-
Grundy [1999] ACTSC 318 cited and followed in Couper –v- ACT Housing [2004]
ACTDT 4.
28. In making this application the applicant/respondent bears the onus of proof. Adopting the
words of the Deputy President in the Firestone application (supra) I am of the view that “it
is clear beyond doubt that the complainant has no arguable case which should be
allowed to be resolved at a full hearing”. This complaint should be struck out on the
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! ground that it lacks substance.
I certify that this and the 6 preceding
pages are a true copy of the decision
and reasons for decision herein of
Mr G C Lalor, Deputy President.
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
S M Welsh
Associate
Dated: 19 June 2007
istLI AustLII AustLI
ustLII AustLI!
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
APPEARANCE DETAILS
FILE NO: DT 1 of 2007
COMPLAINANT: GRAHAM FLETCHER
RESPONDENT: RSPCA
COUNSEL APPEARING: COMPLAINANT:
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! RESPONDENT:
SOLICITORS: COMPLAINANT:
RESPONDENT: MALLESONS
STEPHEN JAQUES
OTHER: COMPLAINANT:
RESPONDENT:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER: MR G C LALOR, DEPUTY PRESIDENT
DATE OF HEARING: 15 June 2007 PLACE: CANBERRA
DATE OF DECISION: 19 June 2007 PLACE: CANBERRA
COMMENT: Must!Il AustLll AustLII AustLI