AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
CITATION: COOLEY AND AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY [2007]
ACTDT 2 (14 FEBRUARY 2007)
DT05/547
Catchwords: Discrimination in education – whether complainant subjected to detriment
by threat and intimidation because of disability – imposition of condition
tLIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi with effect of disadvantage because of disability – awareness of disability.
Discrimination Act 1991, ss 7, 8, 18, 68, 72, 87, 102
ACT Department of Education & Training v Prendergast [2000] ACTDT
(29 December 2000)
Briginshaw v Briginshaw (1938) 60 CLR 336)
De Domenico v Marshall (unreported) [1999] ACTSC 1 (3 February 1999)
Edgely v Federal Capital Press of Australia Pty Ltd [1999] ACTSC 95 (1
October 1999)
Ellis v Mount Scorpus Memorial College [1996] VADT 16 (29 March
1996)
Jamal v Secretary, Department of Health & Anor (1988) EOC ¶92-234
Re Prezzi and Discrimination Commissioner & Ors (1996) 39 ALD 729
Shaikh v Commissioner, NSW Fire Brigades (1996) EOC ¶92-808
Sivananthan v Commissioner of Police [2001] NSW ADT 44
AustLII AustLI! AustLII AustLi
Tribunal: Mr M H Peedom, Deputy President
Date: 14 February 2007
RE: CHRISTOPHER COOLEY
Complainant
AND: AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL
UNIVERSITY
Respondent
ORDER
Tribunal : Mr M H Peedom, Deputy President
Date tLILAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi : 14 February 2007
Order :
The Tribunal is not satisfied, after completing a hearing, that the complainant’s complaint
has been substantiated.
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS, pursuant to section 102(2)(a)(ii) of the Discrimination Act
1991, that the complaint be dismissed.
………………………………
Deputy President
Aust!Il AustLI! AustLII AustLi
RE: CHRISTOPHER COOLEY
Complainant
AND: AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL
UNIVERSITY
Respondent
REASONS
14 February 2007 Mr M H Peedom, Deputy President
The complaint tLILAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi
The complainant in this case is an undergraduate student in Law and Arts at the
Australian National University (“the university”). He first enrolled as a student in
January 2000. Due to a number of health problems affecting him he withdrew from his
studies for part of 2002 and the whole of 2003. He resumed his studies in 2004 but with
a reduced workload.
2. In May 2005 the complainant attended a meeting with the co-ordinator of a unit of
study in which he was involved to discuss his non-attendance at lectures and tutorials.
He claims that he was treated unfavourably by the co-ordinator at the meeting and in the
way that the course was conducted by the co-ordinator because of the disabilities from
which he suffered. He also claims that, after making a complaint of discrimination to the
Discrimination Commissioner, he was dealt with in a way that constituted victimisation.
3. Specifically, in a complaint lodged with the Discrimination Commissioner on 17 June
2005 pursuant to section 72 of the Discrimination Act 1991 (“the Discrimination Act”),
Aust!Il AustLI! AustLII AustLi
the complainant alleged:
(i) that on 20 May 2005, Professor Colin Tatz, an employee of the university
unlawfully discriminated against him in the area of education by
threatening and intimidating him because of his disabilities, contrary to
section 18(2)(c) of the Discrimination Act; and
(ii) that in around January 2005 Professor Tatz unlawfully discriminated
against him in the area of education by imposing a condition for
enrolment in a course of study that had, or was likely to have, the effect of
disadvantaging him because of his disability, contrary to section 18(1)(b)
or, alternatively, section 18(2)(c) of the Discrimination Act.
4. The material lodged by the complainant contained the additional complaint of
victimisation which alleged that comments made about him in a letter dated 10 July 2005
from a solicitor employed by the university to the Discrimination Commissioner
responding to the complainant’s complaint subjected him to a detriment contrary to
section 68(1) of the Discrimination Act. This complaint was not included in the
complaint lodged with the Discrimination Commissioner, was not considered by her and
was not part of the complaint referred to the Tribunal pursuant to section 87 of the
Discrimination Act. The Tribunal therefore declined to consider this complaint (see ACT
Department of Education & Training v Prendergast [2000] ACTDT (29 December
2000)).
The complainant’s evidence
5. In an affidavit dated 24 February 2006 admitted in evidence at the hearing of the
complaint, the complainant gave evidence of the following matters.
tLILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust 6. Since the age of 6 he had suffered from hearing impairment. Since his late teenage
years he had suffered depressive illness. Since 1998 he had suffered diabetes mellitus
type 2. He suffers a variety of side effects as a result of medication prescribed by his
medical practitioners for treatment of some of those conditions, including drowsiness,
nausea, gastro-intestinal upset, insomnia, anxiety, apathy, and confusion.
7. He withdrew from his studies at the university in the second semester of 2002 and
took extended leave of absence from his course for the whole of 2003 due to increasing
anxiety, depression and sub-optimal diabetic control. He resumed his studies in semester
1 of 2004 but reduced his study load from 4 units per semester to 3 units per semester
when it became apparent to him that he was unable to maintain the greater workload due
to the effects of his depressive illness and diabetes.
8. When his hearing aids became unserviceable he arranged a meeting with Mr Paul
Robertson, an adviser with the university’s disability services unit (“the DSU”). The
meeting, held on 31 March 2005, was also attended by his partner, Ms Janet Hume. In
response to the matters that were discussed, Mr Robertson undertook to organise note-
Aust!Il AustLI! AustLII AustLi
takers for the units of study in which he was enrolled and to obtain information on where
he may get his hearing aids fixed. Mr Robertson also offered to contact his lecturers.
9. At the beginning of 2005 his hearing aids became unusable and he was unable to
afford the cost necessary to repair them. During semester 1 of 2005 and for a period of
approximately three weeks in late April to mid-May he suffered a lingering respiratory
infection which he was unable to treat by medication due to his financial state.
10. In 2005 he enrolled in POLS 2096 Genocide Studies (“the unit”), a unit of study
within the faculty of Arts. A document outlining details of the unit was provided by the
university to the complainant. It identified the course presenter as Professor Colin Tatz.
It provided details of the times and dates scheduled for lectures and tutorials. It also
contained a statement by Professor Tatz that “(m)y general rule is that attendance is
compulsory: I attend, you attend. The lecture and tutorial material bear directly on each
of your three assignments”.
11. He did not enrol for tutorials in the unit because he anticipated a clash with the time
scheduled for one of his law degree units. Professor Tatz contacted him by email about
his absence from tutorials. In March 2005, however, he withdrew from the law degree
unit and arranged to attend tutorials for the unit. He then became unable to attend the
tutorials due to his hearing problems, depression and a respiratory infection that lingered
for close to two months.
12. Following a telephone conversation between Ms Hume and Professor Tatz in early
May 2005, he attended a meeting with Professor Tatz on 20 May 2005. He took with him
to the meeting an essay and a tutorial paper that had not been submitted on time. He gave
Professor Tatz a letter dated 1 April 2005 signed by Mr Robertson which stated that the
complainant was registered for disability services and had provided medical
documentation verifying that he had debilitating medical conditions which, among other
tLILAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi things, resulted in him experiencing very low energy levels and fatigue. The letter also
stated that he had recently reduced his course load down to a level that was normally
considered to be two-thirds of a full-time load and his decision to do so was a direct result
of his medical conditions but that the university regarded him as a full-time student. He
also gave to Professor Tatz a medical certificate and a medical report both issued by a
doctor at the university’s health service. The medical certificate, dated 31 March 2005,
stated that the complainant had attended for treatment on 31 March 2005 and was unfit
for work/study from 31 March 2005 until 14 April 2005. It noted that the complainant
stated that he could not work/study from 7 March 2005 to 14 April 2005. The medical
report, dated 3 June 2005, stated that the complainant had been prescribed anti-depressant
medication on 10 January 2005; had been seen regarding a chest infection on 22 March
2005; had been seen on 31 March 2005 regarding a chest infection and broken hearing
aids; and had been prescribed further medication on 3 May 2005 and had discussions
about the medication.
13. The complainant said that after looking at the documents, Professor Tatz said to him
that he had asked people to leave the course who had had far less absences than him and
Aust!Il AustLI! AustLII AustLi
he asked why shouldn’t he do the same with the complainant. He said that he became
anxious and felt threatened and intimidated. He reiterated that each of his absences was
medically certified as were his disabilities and that removing him from the unit would be
unreasonable. Professor Tatz asked why the complainant had not informed him of his
disabilities before. The complainant replied that he didn’t think that he had to as he had
relied on Mr Robertson to have done so. He also said that Ms Hume had advised
Professor Tatz of his disability during the telephone conversation she had had with him
prior to 20 May 2005. Professor Tatz stated he had not received any communication
from the DSU and the complainant accepted that this was the case. He said that Professor
Tatz then asked him more questions about his disabilities and this made him feel
uncomfortable. Professor Tatz then demanded that he write a letter outlining his situation
to the Head of School asking for “special consideration” by 4.30pm that day. It was
approximately midday when the meeting finished. Professor Tatz accepted his essay and
a mutually agreeable date was confirmed for the submission of the remaining assessment
tasks both of which had been submitted on the agreed date. He said that he left the
meeting with Professor Tatz feeling severely shaken and physically trembling. He
delivered the letter to the Head of School requested by Professor Tatz on time. He had to
seek tranquillisers to control his anxiety levels which had become severe.
14. The complainant submitted in evidence the chart showing the results of an aud iogram
test undertaken on 31 May 2001. He also submitted in evidence an audiometric report
dated 9 November 2005. It stated that the complainant had poor tone thresholds which
indicated mild to moderate sensor neural hearing loss in the right ear from 750Hz to 8kHz
and a mild to moderate-to-severe sensor neural hearing loss in the left ear from 250Hz to
8kHz.
15. The complainant was cross-examined by the respondent’s counsel, Ms K Eastman.
In answer to questions asked by her he stated that he had attended lectures in the unit on
22 February 2005, 1 March 2005, 8 March 2005 and 5 April 2005. He had arrived at the
lecture on tLILAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi 22 February 2005 approximately 15 minutes after its scheduled
commencement time. He did not attend any tutorial for the unit during the first semester.
16. The complainant agreed that, in response to an email he had received from Professor
Tatz, he had sent to him an email message on 14 March 2005 in which he explained his
absence from tutorials as due to a clash with other commitments and asked to discuss the
matter at the lecture on 15 March 2005. He apologised “for this stuffing about”. He
agreed that he made no reference in the email about any medical or other condition that
might affect his ability to attend tutorials. He could not remember whether he attended a
lecture on 15 March 2005 but thought he had spoken to Professor Tatz about the matter at
some point. He could not remember when he had done so or whether the communication
was by email message or telephone or other means. He accepted that he had made no
reference in his affidavit to any such communication.
17. The complainant said that at the meeting with Mr Robertson on 31 March 2005 he
had not asked Mr Robertson to contact his lecturers but that Mr Robertson had offered to
do so. He agreed that he had not given evidence of such an offer in his affidavit. He had
Aust!Il AustLI! AustLII AustLi
had no further contact with Mr Robertson.
18. He agreed that by 26 April 2005 a note-taker had attended lectures in the units for
him but that he had taken no action to obtain the notes.
19. The complainant agreed that he had not submitted an assignment that was due on 10
May 2005 on time. He said that he had attempted to contact Professor Tatz by phone
about the matter but there was no answer. It did not occur to him to contact Mr
Robertson or attempt by some other means to contact Professor Tatz. The complainant
agreed that the first time he provided Professor Tatz with information about his
disabilities was at the meeting on 20 May 2005. He disagreed that he had been treated
favourably by Professor Tatz by being allowed to continue in the course despite his
absences from lectures and tutorials. He had only been allowed to continue in the course
after he had argued that he should be permitted to continue and Professor Tatz did not
even both looking at the medical reports. He just took them and put them down and
made the comment to which the complainant took exception.
20. He agreed that he had removed medical records of the university relating to him
without its permission. He said he did so because of the conduct of an officer of the
university.
21. When asked to clarify which documents he had shown to Professor Tatz, he said that
he had given him medical certificates to cover all of his absences from lectures and
tutorials. He had not attached the certificates to his affidavit and he should have done so
but they were contained in a plastic folder which he had with him at the Tribunal. When
asked to produce the certificates, he examined the contents of the folder and said that he
did not have them.
22. tLILAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi The complainant also produced in evidence a medical report from Dr DS McKay
dated 8 November 1998 stating that the complainant was under his care for non-insulin
dependent diabetes and major depressive illness.
23. In an affidavit dated 21 February 2006 Ms Hume said that she had known the
complainant for about 8 years and had been his partner for the last 2 years. She said that
on 31 March 2005 she went with the complainant to the university’s medical centre to see
a doctor and they then met with Mr Robertson at the DSU who, she said, assured the
complainant that he would organise note-takers for lectures and inform the lecturers of
the complainant’s difficulties.
24. In around April 2005 Ms Hume received a telephone call from Professor Tatz who
asked to speak to the complainant. She told him that the complainant was sleeping and
he asked that the complainant return his call. He asked her why the complainant was
communicating with him by email instead of by phone. She explained that the
complainant’s hearing aids were broken and that he had difficulty hearing on the phone.
She also mentioned that the disability officer was organising note-takers for lectures.
Aust!Il AustLI! AustLII AustLi
25. She said that, following the meeting with Professor Tatz in 2005, the complainant
continued to feel negative and suffered debilitating effects including severe anxiety,
sleeplessness and an increase in his depression. He had had to resume taking
tranquillisers which he had discontinued taking for a period of 12 months prior to the
meeting.
26. In cross-examination, Ms Hume said that she had no recollection of any reference at
the meeting with Mr Robertson to the complainant’s HECS census or any discussion with
Mr Robertson about the preparation of a letter to be sent to Centrelink and she only had a
vague recollection about a discussion relating to the complainant’s possible withdrawal
from some of his courses.
The university’s evidence
27. In a written statement dated 27 April 2006 Mr Robertson said that he commenced
working in the DSU in about July 2003. He first met the complainant on 31 March 2005.
By that date he had not received the complainant’s tax file number which was necessa ry
for the complainant to provide to avoid liability to pay the HECS fee for his course
immediately. It was also the last day for students to withdraw from courses without
academic or financial penalties. Prior to the meeting Ms Hume had contacted him and
advised that the complainant wished to obtain assistance to obtain a disability support
pension and getting his hearing aids repaired. He also wanted to discuss the effect of his
ill health on his studies.
28. At the meeting Mr Robertson advised the complainant that he would be better
assisted with obtaining a disability support pension by speaking with the university
tLILAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi welfare officer. He advised him to immediately provide his tax file number to the student
administration staff to avoid liability to immediately pay the HECS fee and suggested that
he should reduce his study load by withdrawing from two units of study. He offered to
prepare a letter for the complainant with a view to him continuing to receive AUSTUDY
support despite the reduction of his study load below the level normally necessary to be
maintained to be eligible for such support. He prepared the letter and gave it to the
complainant to take to Centrelink. He recorded details relating to the complainant to
enable him to provide further assistance should the need arise. He undertook an internet
search to identify organisations which might provide free of low cost assistance with
appliances for people with disabilities. Mr Robertson ascertained from inquiries that he
had made that lecture notes for the units of study being undertaken by the complainant
were not being posted on webCT and he then made arrangements for note-taking for both
units.
29. In cross-examination the complainant put to Mr Robertson that at the meeting he had
with the complainant and Ms Hume on 31 March 2005, he had undertaken to contact his
lecturers. He agreed that he had undertaken to contact them to inquire whether note-
Aust!Il AustLI! AustLII AustLi
takers could be used in their lectures. He said that he would not reveal the name of a
student who he was assisting to a lecturer. He said that he did not offer to provide the
complainant with a disability card because it was the practice of the DSU to only issue
them when a student was required to negotiate course arrangements with a lecturer. At
the meeting on 31 March he had not been made aware of any such requirement.
30. In a written statement dated 26 April 2006 Professor Tatz said that the course outline
of the unit was prepared by him and sent to students enrolled in the course approximately
three weeks before it began. He kept a record of attendance of students by requiring them
to sign a sheet which was circulated in the lecture room. If students did not attend
consecutive lectures, he arranged for an email to be sent to them.
31. In 2005 the unit had 124 enrolled students. The course commenced on 22 February
2005 and ran for 13 two-hour lecture sessions over 16 calendar weeks. At the start of the
semester he arranged for lists of the tutorial times to be posted on a notice board and
invited students to find a place for themselves in the 7 class times available.
32. According to Professor Tatz’s register the complainant attended 3 lectures in person
on 1 March, 8 March and 5 April and a note-taker was present on his behalf at 5 lectures
on 26 April, 3 May, 10 May, 17 May and 24 May. There was no recorded attendance by
the complainant or the note-taker on his behalf on 22 February, 15 March, 22 March, 29
March and 31 May. There was no attendance by the complainant or anyone on his behalf
at any of the 12 tutorial sessions.
33. Professor Tatz sent an email to the complainant in the third week of the course, that
is, early in the second week of March 2005. He asked the complainant why he had not
enrolled in any tutorials and advised him which sessions were not full. In an emailed
response dated 14 March 2005, the complainant stated that he had not been able to
tLILAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi determine which tutorial would not clash with his other commitments and that, due to
confusion as to when the tutorial program for his core law unit would be open for
enrolment, he held off determining which tutorial would fit with a tutorial for the unit.
The end result was that time had slipped and he had not enrolled in a tutorial. He asked
to discuss the matter with Professor Tatz at a lecture on the following day and stated
“please accept my apologies for this stuffing about”.
34. On 18 May 2005 Professor Tatz telephoned the complainant’s home. By that date
the time for submitting an essay worth 50% of the course evaluation had expired 8 days
earlier. He said that a woman answered the phone and explained that the complainant
was still asleep. He told her not to wake him but to ask him to phone him back. She
inquired about the purpose of the call and he told her that it concerned the complainant’s
course of study at the university and his attendance at classes.
35. When the complainant returned the phone call he requested Professor Tatz to use
email to contact him in the future and said that he would come to see him. Professor Tatz
asked him to visit in his office on 20 May 2005.
Aust!Il AustLI! AustLII AustLi
36. At the meeting on 20 May 2005 Professor Tatz stated that he needed to talk with the
complainant about his absences from lectures and tutorials. The complainant said that he
had various disabilities including a hearing impairment, that he was in poor financial
circumstances and could not afford to have his hearing aids repaired. Professor Tatz
suggested that a public health facility might be able to make the repairs and the
complainant said that he was attending to that. Professor Tatz asked the complainant if
he had seen anyone at the university’s DSU and the complainant replied that he had and
produced a certificate from the DSU and some medical certificates. He asked the
complainant why he had waited until 20 May 2005 to inform him of his health issues and
to present the certificates. The complainant replied that he did not know that he had to
inform Professor Tatz of his history and that he assumed that the DSU staff had informed
him. He said that he listened sympathetically to the complainant’s explanation about his
illnesses and told him that he did not want to intrude on his private life or go through the
agony of repeating painful topics. Professor Tatz asked the complainant if he wished to
continue with his studies in the unit and he replied that he was working on his
assignments. Professor Tatz advised the complainant to write a letter to the head of
social sciences school to advise him of the circumstances so as to ensure that at
assessment time the complainant would be given special consideration, that is, that there
would either be mitigation of, or exemption from, the penalties that would normally be
imposed for late essays and non-attendance.
37. Professor Tatz said that he allowed the complainant to submit his essays when he
was ready and exempted him from attending the tutorials which he had already missed
and from attending further tutorials. He allowed him to submit late essays on topics
which were not relevant or were not on the set topics. He graded two of his essays on
their merits and his tutor graded another of his essays. He granted the complainant
exemption from giving a tutorial presentation, allowing him to submit a written tutorial
paper only, thereby giving him the benefit of half of the assignment value of 15%. For
tLILAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi the whole course, the complainant was given a credit pass.
38. In answer to questions asked by the complainant, Professor Tatz said that he was not
advised by the woman who answered the phone when he had phoned the complainant’s
home on 18 April 2005 that the complainant had hearing aids or that he had a problem
with them. He said that at the meeting with the complainant on 20 May 2005 the
complainant had shown him a medical report which related to his diabetes and they had
some discussion about that condition from which they both suffered.
The law to be applied
39. The complainant relies upon section 18(2)(c) of the Discrimination Act as making
unlawful the conduct of Professor Tatz of which he complains at the meeting of 20 May
2005. In addition to section 18(2)(c), section 18(1)(b) is also arguably relevant to the
complaint made by him about the condition of enrolment of students in the unit that made
attendance at lectures compulsory. Section 18 relevantly provides:
Aust!Il AustLI! AustLII AustLi
18 Education
(1) It is unlawful for an educational authority to discriminate against a
person—
……….
(b) in the terms or conditions on which it is prepared to admit the
person as a student.
(2) It is unlawful for an educational authority to discriminate against a
student—
(a) by denying the student access, or limiting the student’s access, to
any benefit provided by the authority; or
(b) by expelling the student; or
(c) by subjecting the student to any other detriment.
40. Pursuant to section 8(1)(a) of the Discrimination Act, discrimination is constituted by
conduct which treats another person unfavourably because of an attribute referred to in
section 7 (see Edgely v Federal Capital Press of Australia Pty Ltd [1999] ACTSC 95 (1
October 1999)).
41. The university did not dispute that the complainant’s diabetes, depression and
hearing impairment were disabilities and, hence, an attribute within section 7 of the
Discrimination Act.
42. tLILAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi For a complaint of discrimination to be substantiated it is necessary for the
discrimination to be proved to a proper standard based upon proper evidentiary material
and there must be a comfortable degree of satisfaction that they have been proved by
evidence which is sufficiently robust to justify the conclusion arrived at rather than
inexact proofs, indefinite testimony or indirect references (see De Domenico v Marshall
(unreported) [1999] ACTSC 1 (3 February 1999) and Briginshaw v Briginshaw (1938) 60
CLR 336)).
Reasons for decision
43. The significant issue to be resolved by the Tribunal, having regard to the evidence
presented and submissions made on behalf of the parties, is whether the respondent
treated the complainant unfavourably by subjecting him to a detriment because of a
disability from which he suffered.
44. A detriment involves some loss, damage or injury (see Shaikh v Commissioner,
NSW Fire Brigades (1996) EOC ¶92-808 and Sivananthan v Commissioner of Police
Aust!Il AustL\ AustLI AustL]]
[2001] NSW ADT 44 at 41) and is broad enough to cover any disadvantage, as long as it
is real and not illusory. Whether a detriment has been suffered is to be determined
objectively and not by the subjective perceptions of either the complainant or the
respondent (see Ellis v Mount Scorpus Memorial College [1996] VADT 16 (29 March
1996)).
45. The detriment to which the complainant alleges he was subjected was the
intimidatory conduct of Professor Tatz (referred to in paragraph 13 above) which caused
him to be shaken, to feel threatened and resulted in increased anxiety levels. The
respondent’s case, based on Professor Tatz’s evidence, is that the conduct of which the
complainant complains did not occur and he was, therefore, not subjected to it.
46. In order for the complaint to be substantiated it is necessary, as observed above, for
the Tribunal to be satisfied to a comfortable degree that the complainant’s version of his
discussion with Professor Tatz on 20 May 2005 is sufficiently robust to justify its
acceptance.
47. There are a number of impediments to accepting the complainant’s evidence. His
evidence regarding the documents he claimed were shown to Professor Tatz at the
meeting on 20 May 2005 was conflicting. In his affidavit he said that the intimidatory
comment made by Professor Tatz occurred after he had shown Professor Tatz his medical
reports. He relied in his submissions on this, and other evidence, as showing that the
comment made by Professor Tatz was made with knowledge of his disabilities. In his
oral evidence to the Tribunal, on the other hand, he said that Professor Tatz did not look
at the reports. He insisted in cross-examination that he had shown Professor Tatz medical
reports to cover all of his absences from lectures and tutorials. When asked to explain the
fact that such reports were not included with his affidavit, he said that he had omitted to
do so but had kept the reports in a folder which he was able to produce. When given an
tLILAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi opportunity to produce them from the folder which he said he had brought to the
Tribunal, he was unable to find any such report. One of the medical reports which he
said he gave to Professor Tatz at the meeting was dated 3 June 2005. Clearly, it would
not have been one of the documents available to him at the 20 May 2005 meeting.
48. Professor Tatz’s evidence was not challenged in cross-examination by the
complainant on any significant aspect of the meeting on 20 May 2005. While there is a
basis upon which to doubt the reliability of the complainant’s evidence, there is no basis
to not accept the evidence of Professor Tatz. In the circumstances, the Tribunal should
not prefer the complainant’s evidence to the conflicting version of Professor Tatz. In that
event, it should find that the complainant has not discharged the onus of establishing that
he was subjected to the conduct of which he complains and the complaint should be
dismissed as not having been substantiated.
49. There is a further basis, in my view, upon which to conclude that the complainant’s
complaint has not been substantiated.
Aust !!! AustLll AustLI AustLi
50. In order to substantiate the complaint it is necessary for the complainant to establish
that there is a causative link between any unfavourable treatment alleged and the
complainant’s disabilities (see Edgely v Federal Capital Press of Australia Pty Ltd [1999]
ACTSC 95). While there is no requirement to establish an intention of the alleged
discriminator to intend to cause unfavourable treatment to the complainant, the act must
be advertent and with knowledge of the complainant’s disabilities or its characteristics
(see Jamal v Secretary, Department of Health & Anor (1988) EOC ¶92-234 and Re Prezzi
and Discrimination Commissioner & Ors (1996) 39 ALD 729). If there is no evidence on
the face of the act complained of, apart from the subjective view of the complainant that
there is a connection, there is no basis for a complaint of discrimination under the
Discrimination Act to be sustained.
51. The complainant submitted that Professor Tatz was aware of his disabilities prior to
any request that he explain his failure to attend lectures and tutorials in the unit. In this
regard he relied upon the assurance he said he was given by Mr Robertson that Mr
Robertson would contact his lecturers; the telephone conversation Ms Hume had with
Professor Tatz on 18 May 2005; the fact that a note-taker attended some of the lectures in
the unit on his behalf and the medical reports he had shown to Professor Tatz at the
meeting on 20 May 2005 prior to him making the comment complained of.
52. Mr Robertson gave evidence that the only contact he undertook to make with the
complainant’s lecturers was to ascertain whether lecture notes for the units involved
could be accessed on a website and whether the use of a note-taker would be permitted.
He said that he would not divulge the name of a student on whose behalf he was making
an inquiry to a lecturer. That evidence is consistent with the DSU published policy that
information obtained by it from students be kept confidential in the absence of a release
signed by the student. There was no evidence of the existence of such a release. Mr
Robertson also recorded the detail of his discussion in a contemporaneous file note which
supports his version of the discussion. Ms Hume’s version of the conversation is
different. tLILAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi But when tested by cross-examination, her recollection of matters discussed
did not accord with matters that both Mr Robertson and the complainant recalled.
Although the complainant gave evidence that Mr Robertson undertook to contact his
lecturers he did not give evidence as to the purpose of such contact. Further, he accepted
that it was possible that there may have been some miscommunication between Mr
Robertson and Professor Tatz.
53. I consider that the Tribunal should accept Mr Robertson’s version of the conversation
on 31 March 2005 and find that Professor Tatz was not advised of any disability from
which the complainant suffered by Mr Robertson.
54. In respect of the telephone conversation between Ms Hume and Professor Tatz I see
no basis upon which to prefer Ms Hume’s evidence to that of Professor Tatz. Even
assuming some reference had been made in April 2005 by Ms Hume to a problem with
the complainant’s hearing aids I see no reason, in the absence of some communication as
requested by Professor Tatz from the complainant to provide information about his non-
attendance at lectures and tutorials, to find that he should be taken to have been on notice
Aust!Il AustLI! AustLII AustLi
of the complainant’s disabilities at the meeting on 20 May 2005.
55. By itself, the fact that Professor Tatz may have been on notice that a note-taker
attended some of the complainant’s lectures on his behalf does not enable any conclusion
to be drawn that Professor Tatz did or ought to have known that the complainant had any
particular kind of disability or at all.
56. I have set out above the Tribunal’s reasons for not preferring the evidence of the
complainant to that of Professor Tatz in relation to their discussion at the meeting on 20
May 2005. Further to those reasons, I would also note that, in his email response of 14
March 2005 to Professor Tatz’s request for an explanation for his failure to enrol in
tutorials for the unit, he made no reference to any disability, including the ma lfunction of
his hearing aids which he said became unusable at the beginning of 2005. Nor was there
any suggestion of a difficulty in communication during the telephone conversation
between Professor Tatz and the complainant on 18 May 2005.
57. In the circumstances, I am not satisfied by the evidence before the Tribunal that
Professor Tatz knew of the complainant’s disabilities before the making of the comment
alleged by the complainant, even if the Tribunal were to accept that such a comment was
made. If made without that knowledge such a comment, by itself, could not amount to
unfavourable treatment of the complainant. At most, it could be regarded as a legitimate
inquiry for some explanation from the complainant as to the reasons for a prolonged
failure to attend the lectures and tutorials in accordance with a general requirement for
compulsory attendance.
58. In relation to the complainant’s complaint that he was discriminated against by the
imposition of the condition that made attendance at lectures and tutorials compulsory, I
note that the condition was expressed to operate as a general rule. By its terms it did not
exclude non-compliance in special cases. It is clear from the evidence that the
tLILAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi university’s course requirements were subject to modification where cause for special
consideration was shown. It is also clear that the complainant’s request for special
consideration was accepted and that the course requirements were adapted to
accommodate his disabilities.
Aust!Il AustLI! AustLII AustLi
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
APPEARANCE DETAILS
To be completed by Member's Staff
________________________________________________________________________
FILE NO: DT05/547
COMPLAINANT: CHRISTOPHER COOLEY
RESPONDENT: AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
COUNSEL APPEARING: COMPLAINANT:
RESPONDENT: MS K EASTMAN
tLILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust
SOLICITORS: COMPLAINANT:
RESPONDENT: MINTER ELLISON
OTHER: COMPLAINANT: SELF
RESPONDENT:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER: MR M H PEEDOM, DEPUTY PRESIDENT
DATE OF HEARING: 1 & 2 FEBRUARY 2007 PLACE: CANBERRA
DATE OF DECISION: 14 FEBRUARY 2007 PLACE: CANBERRA
COMMENT:
AustLI AustLII AustLI AustL|