ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
AUSSIE BUGGY ADVENTURES PTY LTD ACN 635 969 247 v
ACT PLANNING AND LAND AUTHORITY & ANOR
(Administrative Review) [2020] ACAT 104
AT 47/2020
Catchwords: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW decision to issue
– a
prohibition notice pursuant to section 377 of the Planning and
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Development Act 2007 – whether use of premises for an off-
road buggy hire and drive business is inconsistent with the
Crown lease – whether the buggy business could be construed
as ancillary to the purpose of the Crown lease being agriculture
Legislation cited: ACT Civil and Administrative Act 2008 ss 26, 68
Planning and Development Act 2007 ss 247, 377, 408A, sch 1
Tribunal: Senior Member D Kerslake (Presiding)
Senior Member A Davey
Date of Orders: 9 December 2020
Date of Reasons for Decision: 9 December 2020
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL AT 47/2020
BETWEEN:
AUSSIE BUGGY ADVENTURES PTY LTD ACN 635 969 247
Applicant
AND:
ACT PLANNING AND LAND AUTHORITY
Respondent
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! AND:
ANDREW GEIKIE
Party Joined
TRIBUNAL: Senior Member D Kerslake (Presiding)
Senior Member A Davey
DATE: 9 December 2020
ORDER Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
The Tribunal orders that:
1. The decision under review dated 11 June 2020 is confirmed.
………………………………..
Senior Member D Kerslake
For and on behalf of the Tribunal
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. On 11 June 2020, a delegate of the ACT Planning and Land Authority (the
Authority) made a decision to issue a prohibition notice1 under section 377 of
the Planning and Development Act 2007 (PD Act) to Aussie Buggy Adventures
Pty Ltd ACN 635 969 247 (the applicant).
2. The decision to issue the prohibition notice is a reviewable decision, and Aussie
Buggy Adventures Pty Ltd, represented by Mr Brendan Read, submitted an
application for review to the Tribunal on 26 June 2020.
3. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! The matter under review relates to an off-road buggy business at the property
“South Lanyon”, held as Crown lease Block 1188 District 000 Tuggeranong
(the premises)2 by Brian Raymond Read and Helen Aline Read (the lessees).
The lessees have held the Crown lease on the premises since 18 July 2003.
4. Brendan Read, as representative of the applicant, is a son of the lessees, and one
of the principals of Aussie Buggy Adventures.
5. The prohibition notice provides that the activity of operating the buggy
business at the premises:
…must not be carried on by you until such time as the Crown lease is
varied to the extent necessary to permit the activity to be caried on in
relation to the premises3
on the basis that the use of the premises for off road buggy hire and drive is not Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
consistent with the provisions of the Crown lease.
6. The notice of decision4 accompanying the issue of the prohibition notice also
outlined complaints that had been received by Access Canberra about the
activity, and inspections undertaken by Access Canberra staff, together with the
reasons that:
16. The conduct of off-road buggy hire and drive activity is in breach of
the provisions of the Crown lease.
1
T documents pages 30-32
2
Register book Vol 1668, folio 69, issued 25 September 2003; T documents pages 35-46
T documents pages 30-32
stL. AustLll AustLll AustL T documents pages 33-34
17. The activity contravenes:
Planning and Development Act 2007, Planning and Development
Regulations 2008, Schedule 2, part 3(a) - undertaking a
development for which development approval is required without
approval.
18. The Crown lease ‘Purpose’ clause (cl 3(a)) provides the permissible
use of the premises under the Crown lease. The operation of the off-road
buggy hire and drive activity is not permissible under the Crown lease.5
7. The issue of the prohibition notice on 11 June 2020 had been preceded by two
warning letters, the first sent on 14 January 20206 and the second on
24 April 2020. 7 These letters advised that the activity was not consistent with
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! the provisions of the Crown lease and that either the activity needed to cease, or
a development application seeking approval for a compliant lease variation
needed to be submitted within 10 days.
8. According to the further statement of reasons8 provided by the respondent on
14 August 2020, the applicant had advised Access Canberra staff on
29 April 2020 that a development application was in preparation, 9 but that
further complaints had been received about the activity10 and there was no
evidence of a development application having been submitted. 11
9. By directions dated 14 August 2020, the Tribunal ordered that Mr Andrew
Geikie, who is a neighbour of the premises, be made a party joined. Mr Geikie
was self-represented in the tribunal proceedings.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
10. The Tribunal’s hearing of this matter took place on 6 October 2020,
commencing with an on-site inspection of the premises and continuing with a
formal hearing at the tribunal attended by all parties.
Relevant legislation
11. Section 247 of the PD Act provides that:
5
T documents page 34
6
Supplementary T documents pages 138-139
7
Supplementary T documents pages 143-144
8
Further statement of reasons dated 14 August 2020, filed with the Tribunal 14 August 2020
9
Further statement of reasons dated 14 August 2020, paragraph 20
Further statement of reasons dated 14 August 2020, paragraph 21
tl AustLll AustLll AustL Further statement of reasons dated 14 August 2020, paragraph 22
(1)Territory land, or a building or structure on the land, in relation to
which a lease is granted, whether before or after commencement of this
part, must not be used for a purpose other than a purpose authorised by
the lease.
Note Beginning a use of land, or a building or structure on the land, is
development and may require development approval (see s.7
def ”development”, par (d) and s 8, def use, par (a)).
12. Section 377 of the PD Act states:
(1) This section applies if the planning and land authority believes, on
reasonable grounds, that the giving of a notice under this
section (a prohibition notice) is necessary—
(a) to prevent an entity starting, or continuing, to undertake
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust prohibited development; or
(b) to prevent an entity from continuing to
undertake development if:
(i) the entity has started to undertake the development; and
(ii) the development requires development approval; and
(iii) there is no development approval for the development; or
(c) to prevent an entity from continuing to
undertake development other than in accordance with the conditions
of a development approval if—
(i) the entity has started to undertake a development; and
(ii) there is development approval for the development; and
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
(iii) the development undertaken is not in accordance with the
conditions of the development approval.
(2) Also, this section applies to an activity under subsection (1) whether
or not—
(a) a controlled activity order has been made, or is proposed to be
made, in relation to the activity; or
(b) a proceeding for an offence against this chapter in relation to
the activity has begun or is about to begin.
(3) The planning and land authority may give a prohibition notice to 1 or
both of the following:
(a) the lessee or occupier of premises to which the activity
mentioned in subsection (1) relates;
(b) an entity by which or on behalf of which the activity—
(i) was, is being, or is to be, conducted; or
(ii) is likely to be conducted…
(4) The prohibition notice must state—
(a) that it is a prohibition notice under this Act; and
(b) each entity to which it is directed; and
(c) that the notice takes effect when it is given to an entity to which it
is directed; and
(d) the grounds on which the notice is given; and
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! (e) the activity, and the premises, in relation to which the notice
applies; and
(f) that the activity—
(i) must not be carried on by the entity; or
(ii) must not be carried on by the entity except in accordance
with the notice; and
(g) when the notice ends (including, for example, on the happening
of an event stated in the notice).
(5) A prohibition notice takes effect when it is given to an entity to which
it is directed.
13. Section 408A of the PD Act entitles an eligible entity to apply to the Tribunal
for a review of a “reviewable decision”. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
14. Item 47 of Schedule 1 of the PD Act specifies that such an application may be
made by the lessee or occupant of the premises in respect of which a prohibition
notice is issued or a person against whom such a notice is directed.
15. Section 26 of the ACT Civil and Administrative Act 2008 (ACAT Act) provides
that in reviewing a decision:
The Tribunal may inform itself in any way it considers appropriate in the
circumstances.
16. Section 68 of the ACAT Act provides that after reviewing a decision the
Tribunal must either confirm, vary or remit the original decision, or set aside the
decision and substitute a fresh decision.
Issue for determination
17. Under section 377 of the PD Act the Authority is vested with a discretion as to
whether or not to issue prohibition notices. It falls to the Tribunal to determine
whether the issue of such a notice in this particular instance was the correct or
preferable decision.
The applicant’s evidence and contentions
18. The applicant contends that in all the circumstances the issue of a prohibition
notice was unnecessary and unreasonable.
19. By way of background, the applicant told the Tribunal that in 2019 he had
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! sought assistance from Mr Tim Liston to repair a buggy. He and Mr Liston
subsequently entered a partnership to conduct a buggy tour business at the
premises.
20. The applicant further advised the Tribunal that even though they purchased
some buggies in January 2020, they were unable to commence operations at that
time because of bushfires in the area. When they did commence operations – on
21 March 2020 – they had to close shortly afterwards because of COVID 19.
21. On two separate occasions (14 January 2020 and 29 April 2020) the Authority
wrote to the applicant’s parents advising that the business operation was in
contravention of the Crown lease and that the business could not operate at the
premises without approval to vary the terms of the lease.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
22. The applicant submitted that his understanding was that that a buggy tour
operation could properly be considered as farm tourism and therefore an
“ancillary” use under the terms of the lease, because his parents were still
farming and had no intention of not farming.
It's a working farm. It's got livestock in rotation, or in paddocks that get
rotated through, with which we drive. If we open a gate, we shut it; if the
gate is open, we drive through it, we don’t close it, all those types of
things that would probably indicate that it's an activity on a farm. We
thought that that would be reasonably considered farm tourism.12
23. He stated that while his father commenced a process for varying the lease, they
thought it would be permissible to continue to operate the business in the
meantime.
I guess, from our perspective, [we] thought that we would be okay to
continue to trial a business whilst the correct approvals - whilst we
work[ed] our way through exactly what we need[ed] to provide on a 3,300
acre farm.13
24. The applicant further submitted that the issue of a prohibition notice was “heavy
handed”. 14 They would have appreciated:
the actual opportunity to trial a business and see if it works prior to going
through everything, submitting Crown lease variations and other parts.15
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
25. He also said that on the two occasions when control letters were issued the
business was not actually in operation at those particular times.
We started operating again on - so we started operating for the first time,
yes, I think it was 27 May, or whatever the date was. We've actually had
17 days where we've been operational for a trial of this business. So we
actually haven't really trialled it at all but we think it's something that the
public of the ACT would actually like, based on the bookings and
on…people wanting to be involved, I guess.16
26. He explained that the reason they did operate during the period he described
was in order to honour bookings already received.17 When they received an
infringement notice as a result of continuing to operate, the notice was
numbered 005, indicating that few such notices are handed out. He expressed
the view that the apparent rarity of such notices was further evidence that the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
issue of a notice in this instance was heavy handed.
27. Mr Brendan Read, representing the applicant, called as witnesses
Mr Timothy Liston, the other principal of Aussie Buggy Adventures and the
person who runs its operations, and Mr Brian Read, a lessee and land manager
of the premises.
13 Transcript of proceedings 6 October 2020 page 5
14 Transcript of proceedings 6 October 2020 page 12
28. In evidence Mr Liston advised that his initial role was to obtain the right
vehicles, plan a possible layout for tracks and develop a website, while his
partner Brendan Read focussed on finance and insurance. Mr Read’s father was
to focus on his Land Management Agreement for the premises, arranging any
necessary changes. Mr Liston stated that Mr Brian Read had told him that
meetings had been held with the relevant authority to discuss changes to the
Land Management Agreement and that they had been assured this would be a
formality.18
29. Mr Brian Read accepted, under cross-examination, that the use of the premises
for a hire and drive buggy business was not consistent with the terms of the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Crown lease but stated that he had believed that an arrangement would be able
to be worked out with the ACT Government that would allow the activity to
proceed while they “were getting [their] Crown lease varied”. 19
The respondent’s evidence and contentions
30. The respondent submitted that the issue of a notice was the correct or preferable
decision.20 In summary:
(a) Section 377 of the PD Act provides that the Authority may issue a
prohibition notice if it believes, on reasonable grounds, that the giving of a
notice is necessary to prevent the commencement or continuation of a
prohibited activity.
(b) Section 247 provides that Territory land must not be used for a purpose Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
other than a purpose authorised by the lease.
(c) The terms of the Crown lease as to the use of the premises are clear and
unequivocal.21 Under Clause 3(a) of the lease the premises may be used
only for the purpose of agriculture not including the agistment of
horses and ancillary thereto keeping a maximum of eight (8) horses
for personal use and one (1) dwelling.
18 T documents page 10
stL. AustLll AustLll AustL 21 Submissions for the respondent paragraph 62
This clause should be interpreted as meaning that the predominant
purpose of land use is agriculture. Any ancillary use is limited to the
keeping of up to eight horses for personal use.22
(d) A non-compliant activity had been undertaken despite two very clear
letters of warning and with no approvals in place.23
(e) There is no reasonable interpretation under which that activity (the use of
four-wheel drive buggies for tourism) could meet the predominant
purpose set out in the lease or be ancillary to that purpose.24
(f) It is not a true reflection of the business being undertaken to say that these
were farm tours.25
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
(g) There are sound public policy reasons for the Authority to exercise its
discretion to issue a prohibition notice. Ensuring that any development
that occurs on the premises has been through an appropriate approval
process will ensure that the development is orderly and sustainable.26
The party joined
31. In his written submission Mr Andrew Geikie, the party joined, stated that the
applicant was advertising his buggy business online from February 2019 and
continued to operate the business even after letters of warning were issued. He
submitted that if the prohibition notice were to be set aside, the activity would
continue despite there being no Crown Lease variation or planning approvals in
place.27 In his view the prohibition notice should remain in place pending the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
outcome of any approval process.
Consideration of issues
32. The applicant has sought review of a decision by the ACT Planning and Land
Authority to issue a prohibition notice preventing the Crown lessees and Aussie
Buggy Adventures from operating an off-road buggy hire business at the
22 Submissions for the respondent paragraphs 42 and 43
23 Transcript of proceedings 6 October 2020 page 80; Submissions for the respondent paragraph
66
24 Submissions for the respondent paragraph 63
25 Transcript of proceedings 6 October 2020 page79
26 Submissions for the respondent paragraphs 54 and 55
tl AustLll AustLll AustL
premises until such time as the Crown lease is varied to the extent necessary as
would permit conduct of the activity.
33. It is common ground between the parties that the Authority has discretion under
the PD Act to determine whether (or not) to issue a prohibition notice. The issue
for the Tribunal’s consideration is whether the issue of such a notice in this
particular case, on 11 June 2020, was reasonably necessary, or whether some
other course of action (or no action at all) was to be preferred.
34. It is worthwhile at this point to reiterate relevant terms of the Crown lease for
the premises. Clause 3(a) states that the premises may be used
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
only for the purpose of Agriculture not including the agistment of horses
and ancillary thereto keeping a maximum of eight (8) horses for personal
use and one (1) dwelling.
35. Part 1 of the Crown lease defines ancillary to mean “associated with and
directly related to, but incidental and subordinate to the predominant use.”
36. Clause 1 of the lease defines agriculture to mean “broad acre animal farming,
crop and pasture production, and horticulture for commercial wholesale
production.” Horticulture is defined, in turn, as “the use of land for intensive
plant production such as fruit vegetable or flower production (including berries
and vines).”
37. The Tribunal is of the view that the activity of buggy hire and drive as described
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
by the applicant cannot fit within the meaning of agriculture or horticulture.
That is clear from the ordinary meaning of the definitions set out above.
38. The Tribunal next needs to consider whether the activity could be construed as
ancillary to the purpose of agriculture. The Tribunal agrees with the
respondent’s contention that the reference to “ancillary” should not be taken to
mean that any use ancillary to agriculture is permissible on the premises. This is
clear from the definition of ancillary in Part 1 of the Crown lease – it “means
associated with and directly related to, but incidental and subordinate to the
predominant use” (which in this case is agriculture).
39. The Tribunal is of the view that it was reasonably open to the Authority to
th Austell AustLII AustLI categorise the activity as not being directly related but incidental and
subordinate to agriculture. The buggies were being driven on off-road tracks at
the premises at speeds noted to be up to 60 kilometres per hour, 28 a use that
would more appropriately be categorised as a recreational activity rather than
one that meets the purpose of agriculture or is ancillary to that purpose.
40. The Tribunal further notes that the current Land Management Agreement for the
lease, dated November 200129 provides for a mechanism30 for a lessee to notify
the Territory of an intention to seek a variation to include (among a list of other
activities, all of which are evidently excluded by the current lease purpose
clause) “tourism facility or farm-stay accommodation”, which if granted also
then requires both an updated Land Management Plan and a specific Land
Action +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Plan for the proposed additional activity to be prepared. Under
“proposed enterprise(s)”, the current Land Management Agreement does not
identify any tourism or other facility on the property as being proposed.31
41. It finally remains to consider whether the issue of a prohibition notice, as a
consequence of this activity, was the correct or preferable decision in all the
circumstances set out above.
42. Prior to issuing the prohibition notices the Authority sent warning notices to the
lessees of the premises on two occasions, 14 January 2020 and 29 April 2020.
Notwithstanding the applicant’s contention that the business was not in fact
operational at either stage, the letters provided reasonable notice that the
intended use of the premises for buggy hire would constitute a breach of the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
terms of the Territory lease. The applicant was also alerted through personal
discussions with officers of the Authority - on more than one occasion - that the
activity could not proceed without an approved lease variation. The Tribunal
notes the applicant’s evidence about the difficulty in obtaining professional
advice and assistance but neither this, nor the time which may be taken to
process a development application, obviates the need to lodge an application in
the first instance.
28 Evidence of Mr. Liston, transcript of proceedings 6 October 2020 page 17
29 T documents pages 47-89
30 T documents page 52, in paragraph 3c under the heading “Review”
stL. AustLll AustLll AustL 31 T documents page 57
43. Despite all of the above, the applicant contends that it was still unnecessary for
the Authority to go so far as to issue a prohibition notice. The Tribunal does not
agree. In the Tribunal’s view, the Authority had a reasonable apprehension that
the activity – in breach of lease conditions – was highly likely to persist if a
prohibition notice was not issued. It is clear from the evidence presented to the
Tribunal that, despite the issue of warning notices on two occasions, the buggy
hire business subsequently operated on 16 different days. Albeit that the
applicant felt obliged to honour bookings already made, it is equally clear that
this continued activity was in breach of the lease provisions. The applicant also
acknowledges that no development application concerning a variation to the
Crown lease had been lodged by the date on which the prohibition notice had
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
been issued.
44. In such circumstances it is difficult for the Tribunal to conclude other than that
the Authority had reasonable grounds for the issue of a prohibition notice. In
addition to reasonable concerns about non-compliance, by ensuring that the
activity ceased until such time as a development approval application was
submitted and decided the issue of a prohibition notice also served to ensure that
members of the broader community would have the opportunity to exercise their
right to comment on any application variation to the lease conditions. This was
an important public policy consideration.
45. For the reasons outlined above, the Tribunal has concluded that the issue of the
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
prohibition notice was the correct or preferable decision.
46. The decision is confirmed.
………………………………..
Senior Member D Kerslake
For and on behalf of the Tribunal
Date(s) of hearing 6 October 2020
Applicant: Mr B Read, authorised representative
Counsel for the Respondent: Ms K Musgrove, ACT Government Solicitor
Party Joined: In person
th Austell AustLII AustLI