UstLll AustLII AustLI
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
CITATION: JILL DEXTER –v- DONG RONG LUN [2009] ACTRTT (7)
RT 839 of 2008
Catchwords: Reletting fee, fair posting clause; termination via fair posting clause;
endorsement of fair posting clauses.
Tribunal: A. Anforth, Member
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust
Date: 16 February 2009
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL ) No: RT 839 of 2008
]
JILL DEXTER
(Applicant/Landlord)
AND:
DONG RONG LUN
(Respondent/Tenant)
DECISION
The Office of Rental Bonds is to return the residue of the rent retained to the
tenant.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
…………………………….
A. Anforth, Member
16th February 2009
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL ) NO: RT 839 of 2008
JILL DEXTER
(Applicant/Landlord)
DONG RONG LUN
(Respondent/Tenant)
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. The facts are not in dispute. The dispute between the parties is wholly one of law.
2. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! This matter concerns the residue of a rental bond dispute between the parties. The
tenancy commenced on 25 December 2007 for a fixed term of 12 months at a rent
of $320.00 per week and a bond of 1280.00. The tenancy was terminated on 23
Augsut 2008 when the tenant vacate to take a posting outside the ACT in the
course of his employment. The landlord secured a new tenant on 26 August 2008
at a rent of $330.00 per week.
3. Part of the bond has been dispersed in accordance with the parties consent. There
is a residue of $365.72 held by the Office of Rental Bonds which relates to the
dispute between the parties over the landlord’s claim for compensation for a
reletting fee and foregone rent pending the signing of a new tenant to the
premises.
4. The original tenancy agreement contained the standard posting clause of section 8
of the Act which read:
(1) The tenancy agreement may be terminated—
(a) if the lessor is posted to Canberra in the course of the lessor’s employment—by the lessor Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
giving the tenant at least 4 weeks written notice; or
(b) if the tenant is posted away from Canberra in the course of the tenant’s employment—by
the tenant giving the lessor at least 4 weeks written notice.
(2) The tenancy ends—
(a) 4 weeks after the day a notice is received under subclause (1); or
(b) if a later date is stated in the notice—on the stated date.
5. The matter was listed before the Tribunal on 21 January 2009. Ms Hawkins, real
estate agent appeared for the landlord and the tenant appeared in person by phone.
6. Three issues of law arose for resolution at the hearing. The parties had their say
and the Tribunal reserved the matter for written decision. The issues were:
(a) Whether the posting clause required endorsement under section 10 of
the Residential Tenancies Act 1997 (the Act) in order to be valid:
(b) The extent to which the landlord was entitled a any part of the reletting
fee as part of her damages
(c) The relevance of the fact that the landlord managed to relet the
premises for the balance of the fixed term at an increased rent.
The posting clause:
7. Section 10(1) of the Act provides for the endorsement by the Tribunal of any term
that would otherwise be inconsistent with a standard residential tenancy
agreement. Section 8 provides that a residential tenancy agreement contains the
prescribed terms set out in the Schedule to the Act and may contain a fair posting
clause in the terms set out in section 8:
8(1) A residential tenancy agreement—
(a) must contain, and is taken to contain, terms to the effect of the standard residential tenancy
terms mentioned in schedule 1; and
(b) if the lessor and tenant agree—may contain a fair clause for posted people; and
(c) may contain any other term—
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! (i) that is consistent with the standard residential tenancy terms; or (ii) that is inconsistent with a standard residential tenancy term if the term has been endorsed
by the tribunal under section 10.
10(1) The parties to a residential tenancy agreement may apply in writing to the tribunal for
endorsement of a term of the agreement (the inconsistent term) that is inconsistent with a
standard residential tenancy term.
(2) If the parties apply for endorsement of the inconsistent term, the tribunal must do 1 of the
following:
(a) endorse the inconsistent term;
(b) substitute the equivalent standard residential tenancy term for the inconsistent term.
(3) In making a decision under subsection (2), the tribunal must consider—
(a) the criteria determined under subsection (6); and
(b) whether the inclusion of the inconsistent term in the residential tenancy agreement was
obtained by fraud or undue influence.
(4) The tribunal must not endorse a term that is inconsistent with this Act (other than a
standard residential tenancy term).
(5) The tribunal must not endorse a term mentioned in section 15 (5) in relation to a tenant Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
unless satisfied that the tenant owes an amount to the commissioner for housing.
(6) The Minister may determine criteria for subsection (3) (a).
(7) A determination is a disallowable instrument.
8. Section 8(1)(b) does not require that the fair posting clause be endorsed under
section 10, rather it states that by agreement the parties can simply insert the fair
posting clause into the residential tenancy. Put simply, a fair posting clause
inserted by this process forms part of the residential tenancy agreement and
therefore cannot be inconsistent with the residential tenancy agreement and
therefore does not require endorsement pursuant to section 10.
9. If the fair posting clause of section 8 merely formed part of the Act then it may be
arguable that an endorsement under section 10 may be required in order to
introduce the fair posting clause into the residential tenancy agreement itself. This
is because section 10 requires endorsement of any terms that is inconsistent with
the prescribed terms of Schedule, as opposed to being inconsistent with any term
of the Act itself, and the fair posting clause is arguably inconsistent with
prescribed term 88. However, section 8 does not merely introduce the fair posting
clause as a term of the Act, it goes further and permits the fair posting clause to be
incorporated into the residential tenancy agreement itself and therefore to have
contractual application. In this event the fair posting clause clearly forms an
exception to prescribed term 88 and is not therefore inconsistent with prescribed
term 88.
10. Notwithstanding the above the Tribunal is still deluged with applications by
landlord’s and their agents to endorse fair posting clauses. As long as the fair
posting clause is in the terms set out in section 8 of the Act, the endorsement is not
necessary and is a waste of resources by all concerned. If the fair posting clause
differs materially from the standard fair posting clause in section 8 then
endorsement may still be required.
The reletting fee: +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
11. The claim for the reletting fee arises under either 62(1)(b) or section 84(1)(b)(ii)
of the Act which both permit the Tribunal to award compensation for “the
reasonable costs of advertising the premises for lease and of giving a right to
occupy the premises to another person”. Sections 62(3)(b) and 84(3)(b)
respectively limit the total compensation for these claims to one weeks rent.
12. The reletting fees arises from the landlord’s contract for services with its agent.
Under the standard terms of retainer the agent is entitled to the first weeks rent
upon the reletting of the premises under a new tenancy. Thus when a tenant
vacates premature in the fixed term the agent is required to find a new tenant and
bills the landlord for the first week of rent under the new tenancy thereby causing
loss to the landlord.
13. The traditional approach taken by the Tribunal and by its NSW counterpart is to
view the reletting fee in the context of an abandonment of a fixed term tenancy as ustLI Aust !!! AustLll AustLi
a brought forward cost rather than as an entirely new cost. The rationale is that the
tenant could have lawfully terminated the tenancy at the end of the fixed term and
the landlord would then have been up for the same reletting fee at that point in
time. The premature vacation of the premises by the tenant merely brought
forward this cost. For this reason the approach taken is to permit the reletting fee
at a pro-rata rate depending on the extent of the fixed term that had expired at the
time the tenant abandoned the property (Residential Tenancies Law and Practice
in NSW 4 th ed Anforth and Christensen at [2.16.10]). In the present case the tenant
left the premises 2/3 of the way through the fixed term and thus the landlord
would ordinarily be entitled to a reletting fee of 1/3 of one weeks rent.
14. The total amount allowable for the reletting fee must be aggregated with the
advertisement costs under sections 64 84(1)(b)(ii) and the total of these two sums
is capped at 1 week of rent by section 8(3)(b)(ii).
15. The abandonment of premises during a fixed term operates to terminate the lease
(section 36(e) of the Act). The landlords entitlements to compensation in these
circumstances, whether under section 62 or 84 has been addressed at length by the
presently constituted Tribunal in Mies v Phillips 2006 ACTRTT 1; Elvin v
Meischke and Lee 2008 ACTRTT 18, Hutcheson v McMaster 2008 ACTRTT 14
and Hookway v Boxsell 2008 ACTRTT 19 the content of which is not repeated
here.
16. However if the tenant vacates part way through a fixed term in accordance with a
valid posting clause, then there has been no abandonment or other unlawful
termination of the fixed term lease by the tenant. If the parties agree as a term of
the residential tenancy agreement that the tenant may vacate during a fixed term in
accordance with a fair posting clause then the landlord has not been unlawfully or
unfair treated by the tenant who relies upon that clause.
17. Thus there is no “abandonment” of the premises for the purposes of section 62 and
the landlord is not entitled to any compensation arising from the tenant’s reliance
on the fair posting clause.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
18. Section 84 is a little less clear than section 62 because section 84 does not use the
terminology of “abandonment”. Nevertheless is clear that section 84 is premised
on an unlawful termination by the tenant, albeit that the tenant has provided notice
to the landlord of that unlawful intention. It is inconceivable to the Tribunal that
the legislature and the parties intended to confer a right on a tenant to terminate a
fixed term lease in the circumstances of the fair posting clause but then to permit
the landlord, via an order of the Tribunal under section 84, to abrogate the
statutory and contractual right of the tenant.
19. Section 84 must be read consistent with section 8 with the result that no
application of section 84 arises if the tenant vacates in accordance with the fair
posting clause.
20. In the present case the tenant did in fact vacate in accordance with fair posting
clause in his tenancy agreement and therefore has committed no breach that gives
rise to any claim for compensation at all.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
21. In the light of this finding it is not necessary to address the third issue referred to
at paragraph 6 above as to which Mies v Phillips 2006 ACTRTT 1; Elvin v
Meischke and Lee 2008 ACTRTT 18 and Hutcheson v McMaster 2008 ACTRTT
14 are relevant.
22. In consequences of the above finding, the Office of Rental Bond is to return to the
whole of the remaining bond to the tenant.
A. Anforth
16th February 2009