ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
COUNCIL OF THE LAW SOCIETY OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY v LP 201809 (Charles Filgate Giles)
(Occupational Discipline) [2021] ACAT 1
OR 9/2018
Catchwords: OCCUPATIONAL DISCIPLINE – costs – costs assessment –
powers of the Registrar to assess costs pursuant to the ACT Civil
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! and Administrative Procedure Rules 2020 – principles of the
tribunal under the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
2008 – where a bill of costs was prepared prior to the costs
assessment – where procedures are to be as inexpensive as is
consistent with achieving justice – Registrar to determine
procedure for costs assessment – bill of costs allowed – order for
costs made
Legislation cited: ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008 ss 7, 48
Legal Profession Act 2006 s 433
Subordinate
Legislation cited: ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2020 r 71
Court Procedures Rules 2006 r 1809
Cases cited: Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
v LP 201809 (Charles Filgate Giles) [2019] ACAT 60
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Tribunal: Deputy Legal Registrar E Steel
Date of Orders: 6 January 2021
Date of Reasons for Decision: 6 January 2021
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) OR 9/2018
BETWEEN:
COUNCIL OF THE LAW SOCIETY OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Applicant
AND:
LP 201809
Respondent
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
TRIBUNAL: Deputy Legal Registrar E Steel
DATE: 6 January 2021
ORDER
The Tribunal orders that:
1. The assessed costs for the costs order made on 27 June 2019 are $118,096.22
2. The costs of the assessment are $13,109.16
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
3. The total amount which the respondent is to pay the applicant is $131,205.38
………………………………..
Deputy Legal Registrar E Steel
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. In 2018 the Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory (the
Law Society) applied to the Tribunal for disciplinary orders under the Legal
Profession Act 2006 (Legal Profession Act) arising from the professional
conduct of the respondent, who practised as a legal practitioner in the Australian
Capital Territory (ACT).
2. The tribunal made orders and gave reasons in relation to liability on 27 June
2019: Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v LP
201809 (Charles Filgate Giles) [2019] ACAT 60.
3. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Usually, parties to an application in the tribunal must bear their own costs,
except in limited circumstances.1 One of those circumstances applies to these
proceedings, as section 433 of the Legal Profession Act is an authorising law
about costs orders for this type of ACAT matter.
4. Order 3 of the tribunal orders of 27 June 2019 is an order that the respondent
pay the applicant’s costs of the proceedings as agreed or as assessed by the
Registrar.
5. Rule 71 of the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2020 (the ACAT
Rules) commenced on 1 February 2020. It sets out the functions of the Registrar
in assessing and making orders about costs, including:
(2) An order for assessed costs may specify the scale or process for assessing Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
costs.
(3) If the tribunal makes an order for assessed costs, the registrar must assess
the costs in accordance with the order and these rules.
(4) At the end of a costs assessment the registrar must issue an order
specifying—
(a) the assessed costs for the costs order; and
(b) the costs of the assessment.
(5) If no order is made under subrule (2), the registrar may decide the scale and
procedure to be followed to determine the assessed costs and the costs of the
assessment.
1 See ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008 section 48
6. The 27 June 2019 orders were for costs as agreed or assessed, rather than for a
fixed amount. The order for assessed costs did not specify the scale or the
procedure for assessing those costs.
7. As a result, it was open to the Registrar to decide the scale and procedure to be
followed. Rule 71(6) and (7) of the ACAT Rules include things the Registrar
may decide to do in those circumstances:
(6) Without limiting the registrar’s power to assess costs, the registrar may decide
to do any of the following:
(a) conduct a hearing by any means, including on the papers;
(b) require a bill of costs to be prepared;
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! (c) require a list of objections to items in a bill of costs to be prepared;
(d) apply a scale of costs under the Court Procedures Rules 2006;
(e) require the parties to attend a dispute resolution process;
(f) assess the costs in an amount agreed by the parties to the costs order
without proceeding to a full assessment.
(7) The registrar may be informed of facts in any way the registrar considers
appropriate.
8. The applicant lodged an application for interim or other orders on 16 September
2020, asking the tribunal to make orders about costs.
9. That application attached a bill of costs, together with an affidavit setting out
the attempts to reach an agreement with the respondent outside the tribunal, and
the basis for seeking costs and the costs of the assessment.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
10. Pursuant to Rule 71 of the ACAT Rules, the Registrar made orders on 7 October
2020:
a. requiring the parties to attend a dispute resolution process, namely a
conference convened by the Registrar, listed for 17 November 2020; and
b. requiring the respondent to prepare and file a list of objections to the
applicant’s bill of costs, on or before 5 November 2020.
11. I was satisfied that the respondent was made aware of the 17 November
conference, the requirement to prepare a list of objections, and the consequences
for not participating, and that he had been served with the bill of costs:
a. the orders of 7 October 2020, together with the application and
attachments, including the bill of costs and the listing notice for the
conference, were served on the respondent’s previous legal
representatives. They replied to say they no longer acted for him;
b. the orders and related documents were then sent to the respondent
himself on 16 October 2020;
c. the respondent replied by email later that day to say that he did not
intend to participate in the costs proceedings;
d. tribunal Registry staff acknowledged his email, and informed the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
respondent that the matter remained listed for conference and, if he did
not participate, orders may be made in his absence;
e. on 13 November 2020 the tribunal sent a further confirmation email to
the parties with the details of the audio-visual link for the 17
November conference;
f. on 16 November 2020 the respondent emailed the tribunal to say that
he would not be able to attend the conference and asked for an
alternative date in one week. No further information about the reason
for, or evidence in support of, the request was included or attached;
g. I took this to be a request for an adjournment. As there was no basis to
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
grant the adjournment, the request was refused. Registry staff replied
to the respondent to tell him that his request for an adjournment had
been considered in light of ACAT’s Practice Note No 2,
Adjournments, and that the request had not been granted. He was
reminded that the proceedings were going ahead as listed and, if he did
not attend, orders may be made in his absence.
12. The respondent did not file a list of objections to the bill of costs.
13. The legal representative for the applicant appeared at the conference on 17
November via the pre-arranged audio-visual link. The respondent did not
appear. He did not appoint a representative to appear on his behalf. He did not
provide any further evidence in support of his application for an adjournment.
Being satisfied that he was aware of the proceedings but had failed to appear
either personally or by a representative, I proceeded to hear the costs application
in his absence.
Procedure for assessing costs
14. The next step was to “decide the scale and procedure to be followed to
determine the assessed costs and the costs of the assessment”.2
15. In deciding how to proceed, I considered the rules dealing with similar matters
under the Court Procedures Rules 2006 (Court Procedure Rules). In
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! particular, Rule 1809 of those Rules applies if the party liable for costs does not
file a notice of objection to the bill of costs. Rule 1809 reads:
1809 Costs — default assessment if no objection to bill of costs
(1) This rule applies if the party liable for costs does not file a notice of
objection to the bill of costs.
(2) On proof that the bill of costs was served on the party liable for the
costs, the registrar must —
/////////////// /
(a) assess the costs without considering each item and by
allowing the costs claimed in the bill of costs; and
AustLI
(b) issue a certificate of assessment for the amount of the assessed
costs.
(3) However — AUSEL !!
(a) despite subrule (2) (a) —
(i) the costs must be assessed subject to rule 1804 (Costs —
payment of disbursements); and
(ii) the costs of attending the assessment of costs (other than
attendances the registrar considers necessary), and any
other anticipated costs included in the bill, are not
allowable; and
(b) subrule (2) (a) does not prevent the registrar correcting an
obvious error in the bill of costs or assessing the costs
differently in exceptional circumstances.
16. In this case, the respondent had been served the bill of costs, he was given an
opportunity to file a list of objections to items in the bill of costs, but no
objections had been filed.
2 ACAT Rules rule 71(5)
17. I decided to adopt the approach of Rule 1809 of the Court Procedures Rules and
assess the costs without considering each item, and by allowing the costs
claimed in the bill of costs
18. There were no exceptional circumstances to warrant assessing these costs
differently. There was no indication that the bill of costs included an account
that had not been paid.
19. Rule 1809(b) does not prevent the Registrar correcting an obvious error in the
bill of costs. I assessed the bill of costs for that purpose but did not identify any
obvious errors.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
20. The process under Rule 1809 is an assessment of the costs without considering
each item. Although not required to do so, out of an abundance of caution I did
review the bill of costs more generally. I also heard from the applicant about the
basis for the amounts claimed and was satisfied that there was a proper basis for
the amounts sought. I formed the view that the costs in the bill of costs were
reasonable amounts and were reasonably incurred.
21. The assessed costs will be the amount sought in the bill of costs, i.e.
$118,096.22.
Cost of assessment
22. Consistent with the principle that tribunal procedures are to be “simple, quick,
inexpensive and informal as is consistent with achieving justice”,3 the ACAT Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Rules about costs include the means to resolve costs disputes without the time
and expense of proceeding to a full assessment. For example, under Rule
71(6)(e) and (f) the Registrar may:
(e) require the parties to attend a dispute resolution process;
(f) assess the costs in an amount agreed by the parties to the costs order
without proceeding to a full assessment.
23. If there is no resolution, those Rules do allow the Registrar to require a bill of
costs to be prepared, and then to require a list of objections to be filed, before
conducting a hearing by any means.
3 ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008 section 7
24. In this case, a bill of costs was prepared prior to filing the application to assess
costs. The applicant addressed the question of why the costs of preparing the
bill of costs should be awarded as part of the costs of the assessment,
particularly given Rule 71(6) of the ACAT Rules.
25. On this occasion, given the fact that the bill of costs was prepared prior to the
commencement of the ACAT Rules, and given its role in the parties’ efforts to
resolve the matter prior to making the costs assessment application, I was
satisfied that it was appropriate to award the costs of its preparation. I was also
satisfied that the remaining costs of the assessment were reasonable, including,
for example, legal costs incurred in attempts to reach an agreement about costs.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
26. For similar matters in future, parties should be prepared to explain if they have
gone to the expense of having a bill of costs prepared before the Registrar has
required it, and before participating in a dispute resolution process in the
tribunal.
27. The costs of the assessment are awarded in the amount of $13,109.16.
Orders
The Tribunal orders:
4. The assessed costs for the costs order made on 27 June 2019 are $118,096.22
5. The costs of the assessment are $13,109.16
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
6. The total amount which the respondent is to pay the applicant is $131,205.38
………………………………..
Deputy Legal Registrar E Steel
Date(s) of hearing 17 November 2020
Solicitors for the Applicant: Ms K Binstock, McInnes Wilson Lawyers
Respondent: N/A