istLI AustLII AustLI
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
CITATION: SUELLEN PATERSON AND PETER
CLARKE [2009] ACTDT 3
DT 7 of 1998
Catchwords: Sexual harassment – Discrimination – Victimisation
- Causal link – Proof – Remedy.
Provisions considered
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Discrimination Act 1991 (Republication No. 3 (RI),
ss. 7, 8, 58, 59, 68 and 102.
List of cases cited
Almassey AND Omari and ACT Multicultural Council
Inc. [2008] ACTDT 2
Briginshaw v Briginshaw [1938] HCA 34;
(1938) 60 CLR 336
De Domenico v Marshall [1999] FCA 1305.
Duhbihur v Transport Appeal Board
[2005] NSWSC 811
Hall v A & A Sheiban Pty Ltd [1989] FCA 72
Kwesius and ACT Health [2008] ACTDT 3
McCormack and Charles Sturt University
[2008] ACTDT 4
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Michael Firestone v Australian National University
[2009] ACTDT 1
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL ) NO: DT 7/98
RE: SUELLEN JOY PATERSON
Complainant
AND: PETER M ILTON CLARKE
Respondent
ORDER
Tribunal +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! : Mr R J Cahill, President
Date : 3 August 2009
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS:
1. That the Tribunal is satisfied that the Complainant’s
complaint against the Respondent in relation to an incident
of sexual harassment on 11 June 1996 has been
substantiated and that the Respondent contravened
section 59 of the Discrimination Act 1991 (as it stood at that
time).
2. That the Respondent pay $1000.00 to the Complainant as
compensation for the loss and damage the Complainant
suffered as a result of the Respondent’s sexual harassment.
3. That the Complainant’s claim that she was discriminated Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
against, and victimised by, the Respondent, in particular, by
the Respondent reducing the shifts of work allocated to her
or by her making a complaint against the Respondent, has
not been substantiated.
4. That the parties bear their own costs.
...............................
President
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL ) NO: DT 7/98
RE: SUELLEN PATERSON
Complainant
AND: PETER CLARKE
Respondent
REASONS
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Mr R J Cahill, President
3 August 2009
1. On 3 August 2009, I made an order in this matter and delivered
my reasons orally. Now, I set out the detailed reasons in writing.
2. This matter concerns a complaint made by Ms Suellen Paterson
(the Complainant) against Mr Peter Clarke (the Respondent) under the
Discrimination Act 1991 (also referred to as “the Act”).
3. I should mention that the matter had been dormant in the
records of the Discrimination Tribunal because at one early stage,
some time ago now, Mr Clarke, the Respondent in the matter, left
Canberra and has been unable to be located, even by his own
solicitor, who was then acting for him.
4. So for some time the matter stayed that way, but due to the fact Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
that this matter, if it was heard today, would come before the ACAT
Tribunal, and not the individual Discrimination Tribunal, it is
necessary to finalise the matter without Mr Clarke’s further
involvement. He has not appeared or responded to any notice or any
contact we have endeavoured to make of him from the Discrimination
Tribunal.
5. The Complainant complained to the ACT Human Rights Office
that she was discriminated against by the Respondent in the public
area of employment because of sexual harassment and was victimised
by him because of her making or supporting a complaint of
discrimination. Her complaint was received by the Human Rights
Office on 25 March 1997, although she had dated the complaint as
17 March 1996. I take 25 March 1997 as the date of the complaint.
6. The version of the Discrimination Act as at the date of the
complaint was Republication No. 3 (RI) (Effective: 31 January 1997 –
22 September 1997) (also referred to in these reasons as “the Act”).
7. The Respondent ran the Homestead Bistro, a restaurant, at the
Tuggeranong Rugby Union & Amateur Sports Club, Wanniassa, under
contract from the Club (the Club). The contract was with Eastco
Constructions Pty Ltd, of which the Respondent was known to be a
director. The Complainant worked in the Bistro as a casual waitress.
8. In her complaint, the Complainant alleged that the Respondent
continually subjected her to dirty jokes, and on 11 January 1996, he
approached her in the kitchen, that she struggled to get away from
him, and that he put his hand down her trousers inside her
underpants and pulled down halfway up her back. She complained
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! that she was shocked and felt physically sick.
9. As the offer of the ACT Discrimination Commissioner (of the
Human Rights Office) to conciliate the matter was declined by the
Respondent, the Commissioner referred the matter, with the consent
of the Complainant, to this Tribunal in January 2008.
Procedural history
10. The matter was first called over on 10 March 1998. On
14 April 1998, the Tribunal directed the Complainant to file and serve
particulars of the complaint, list of witnesses and proofs of evidence
on or before 28 April 1998, and for the Respondent to file and serve
particulars or defence, list of witnesses and proofs of evidence on or
before 28 April 1998.
11. On 27 May 1998, the Tribunal directed that the Complainant
comply with the directions of 14 April 1998, by 3 June 1998. After a Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
listing on 18 August 1998, in the hearing on 19 August 1998, the
Tribunal directed that the Complainant comply with the direction
outstanding by 25 August 1998, and if not leave would be granted to
the Respondent to file strike out application.
12. The Complainant filed the particulars on 25 August 1998. The
matter was listed on 23 October 1998, 19 November 1998 and
22 December 1998.
13. The Respondent filed its response on 19 November 1998 and on
26 November 1998, filed an affidavit setting out his version of the
facts. On 23 December 1998, the Tribunal made an order that the
Respondent file further particulars before 22 January 1999. The
matter was listed on 9 February 1999.
14. On 6 January 1999, Baxter’s Lawyers sent a letter that they
took carriage of the matter for the Complainant and Baxter & Butler
Lawyers ceased to exist.
15. On 22 January 1999, the Tribunal received the Respondent’s
further particulars dated 18 January 1999. The matter came before
the Tribunal on 4 February 2000, 9 February 2000, 3 March 2000
and 20 April 2000. The Respondent was asked to file and serve list of
witnesses by 17 March 2000.
16. On 15 May 2000, an order was made requiring that the
Complainant file further submissions by 31 May 2000, the
Respondent file further submissions and particulars and serve by
14 June 2000, and the Complainant file any response to the
Respondent’s submission by 21 June 2000.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
17. On 25 September 2000, the Complainant filed further
submissions. The Respondent did not comply with the order of
15 May 2000. There was a call over on 23 March 2001.
18. In March 2000, Mr John Wilson, of the lawyers for the
Respondent, advised that the Respondent moved to NSW. The
Respondent gave evidence at the hearing of 20 April 2000. It appears
that thereafter the Respondent’s lawyer was unable to contact the
Respondent. The Tribunal’s letter of 24 April 2001 to the Respondent
was not responded.
19. By a letter dated 17 April 2001, Wilson-Legal, acting for the
Respondent, advised that they did not have instructions from the
client. By an email of 25 September 2003, Christopher Chenoweth,
Solicitors, advised that they took over from Baxter & O’Keefe Lawyers,
lawyers for the Complainant, as its statutory manager. Chenoweth’s
letter of 23 August 2004 stated that the Complainant had collected Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
her file and would act personally. Her contact particulars were given.
20. The delay in finalising this matter was due to the parties not
taking steps to pursue with the matter.
21. There were Tribunal proceedings on 9 February 1999,
20 April 2000 and 23 March 2001.
Legislative Provisions
22. As I said in paragraph 6 above, the version of the Discrimination
Act as at the date of the complaint was Republication No. 3 (RI)
(Effective: 31 January 1997 – 22 September 1997), which applies to
the matter before me.
23. Sexual harassment is defined in section 58 of the Act as follows:
“M eaning of sexual harassment
58. (1) For the purposes of this Part, a person subjects
another person to sexual harassment if the person makes an
unwelcome sexual advance, or an unwelcome request for sexual
favours, to the other person or engages in other unwelcome
conduct of a sexual nature in circumstances in which the other
person reasonably feels offended, humiliated or intimidated.
(2) A reference in subsection (1) to conduct of a sexual nature
shall be read as including a reference to the making of a
statement of a sexual nature to, or in the presence of, a person,
whether the statement is made orally or in writing.”
24. Section 59 which deals with sexual harassment in employment.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! “Employment etc.
59. (1) It is unlawful for an employer to subject an employee,
or a person seeking employment, to sexual harassment.
(2) It is unlawful for an employee to subject a fellow
employee, or a person seeking employment with the same
employer, to sexual harassment.
(3) It is unlawful for a principal to subject a commission agent
or contract worker, or a person seeking to become his or her
commission agent or contract worker, to sexual harassment.
(4) It is unlawful for a commission agent or contract worker to
subject a fellow commission agent or contract worker to sexual
harassment.
(5) It is unlawful for a partner in a partnership to subject
another partner in the partnership, or a person seeking to
become a partner in the partnership, to sexual harassment.
(6) It is unlawful for a workplace participant to subject another
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
workplace participant, or a person seeking to become a
workplace participant at that workplace, to sexual harassment
at a place that is a workplace, or potential workplace, as the
case requires, of both of those persons.
(7) In this section—
“place” includes a ship, aircraft or vehicle;
“workplace” means a place at which a workplace participant
works or otherwise carries out functions in connection with
being a workplace participant;
“workplace participant” means any of the following:
(a) an employer or employee;
(b) a commission agent or contract worker;
(c) a partner in a partnership.”
25. Section 7 of the Act provides for the grounds of discrimination.
Section 8 provides for what constitutes discrimination. Sexual
harassment is an unlawful act under the Act but is not a ground of
discrimination unless it is discrimination on the ground of sex. In
this matter there is no issue of discrimination on the ground of sex.
26. Victimisation in the present context is where a person is
subjected to detriment because a person has made a complaint
against the other person, reasonably asserted rights under the Act, is
believed to be proposing to take such steps and the like. Section 68
provides for victimisation.
“Victimisation
68. (1) It is unlawful for a person to subject another person to
any detriment on the ground that the other person has—
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! (a) made a complaint under this Act;
(b) instituted proceedings against any person under this Act;
(c) given information or produced a document to a person
exercising a power or performing a function under or in
relation to this Act;
(d) given information, produced a document or answered a
question when required to do so under this Act;
(e) reasonably asserted any rights that a person (including
that other person) has under this Act; or
(f) alleged that a person has committed an act which is
unlawful under this Act;
or on the ground that the first-mentioned person believes that
the other person proposes to do such an act.
(2) Paragraph (1) (f) does not apply in relation to an allegation
that is false and is not made in good faith.”
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Facts
27. As I stated in paragraph 5 above, in her complaint to the
Human Rights Office, the Complainant alleged that she was
discriminated against in employment by sexual harassment by the
Respondent and was victimised because of making or supporting a
complaint of discrimination.
28. In her Particulars of the complaint to the Tribunal dated
25 August 1998, the Complainant contended that she was sexually
harassed by the Respondent. She did not refer to discrimination or
victimisation. She relied on section 58 for her complaint but the
Tribunal regards the correct provision is section 59. Section 58
defines sexual harassment, and section 59 makes it unlawful for a
person to subject another person to sexual harassment in
employment. The Complainant’s submission of 4 September 2000
also referred only to the issue of sexual harassment not to
discrimination and victimisation. Nevertheless, I have considered
whether the events had also given rise to discrimination and
victimisation.
29. The facts that gave rise to the complaint are set out in
paragraphs 7 and 8 above.
30. The Complainant reported the incident of 11 January 1996 to
the Club and the Club’s Human Relations Manager, Mr Barry
Masters, arranged for the Complainant and the Respondent to enter
into an agreement dated 1 August 1996, in which both parties agreed
to settle any differences, problems or misunderstandings arising from
the alleged sexual harassment claim by the Complainant against the
Respondent.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
31. The terms included that the Complainant be continued to be
employed, be given equal employment opportunity with other
employees, the Complainant not pursue the alleged sexual
harassment claim provided the Respondent does not do anything
similar to the alleged incident which offends the Complainant and the
parties discuss with Mr Masters if they feel the agreement has been
broken. I must say, that was an attempt at mediation by the Club
operation and that does not represent conciliation under the
Discrimination Act, or a conciliation agreement, but it is indication of
an attempt by the Club to solve the difficulties between the parties.
32. Sometime later, the Complainant appeared to have written to
the Club to the effect that the Respondent reduced her shifts
thereafter. From 4 September 1996, she ceased to work in the Bistro.
The Respondent denied the allegations and claimed that his business
was going down but the Complainant’s shifts were the same as any
other casual waitresses and that all waitresses work to the roster. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
I must say, as I mentioned later on, it seems to me that those things
occurred and it was evident that the business of the Complainant was
going downwards appears to be evident.
33. On 10 September 1996, the Respondent wrote to the
Complainant about her declining to attend a meeting that was said to
have been arranged to discuss certain employment issues, and
advised his inability to offer employment until some issues were
discussed. It appears that the issues related to a complaint by the
Complainant to the Club about an attempt to implicate her in a drink
set up.
34. In her affidavit, the Complainant stated that after the sexual
harassment, she suffered anxiety, vomiting, diarrhoea, loss of
confidence and feeling of insecurity, and that her physical and
emotional health suffered (see, T-document 8b).
35. It appears that after these events, the Complainant filed a
complaint with the Human Rights Office.
Particulars of the complaint
36. In the Particulars of the complaint, it is alleged that on
11 June 1996, the Respondent kissed the Complainant on the back of
the neck after raising her hair (at around 7 pm – according to the
Complainant’s reply), and later that evening put his hands down the
back of the trousers the Complainant was wearing and placed his
hands inside her underpants (at around 7:45 pm and 8 pm –
according to the Complainant’s reply).
37. The Complainant claimed that this was a contravention of the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Discrimination Act 1991, in particular, it constituted “unwelcome
conduct of a sexual nature in circumstances in which the other
person reasonably feels offended, humiliated or intimidated”. That is
the definition of sexual harassment, rather than any discrimination.
Because of the above incidents, she claimed that she was forced to
leave her employment.
38. Of course, it is interesting that that occurred before the
mediation attempts by the club when the parties attempted to come to
some agreement. The Complainant also alleged she was the subject of
jokes and attempts at behaviour which was of a sexual nature from
the Respondent. It is interesting to note those matters did not occur
in the original complaint, and thus would, to some extent, could fall
foul of the De Domenico decision (see, De Domenico v Marshall [1999]
FCA 1305), or alternatively, could be said to be the background to the
principal incident involving the touching under her pants.
39. The Respondent has always denied the allegations. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Causal link and proof
40. In relation to complaints of discrimination, sexual harassment
or victimisation, under the Discrimination Act, the onus lies with the
Complainant to prove the allegation to the reasonable satisfaction of
the Tribunal (see Briginshaw v Briginshaw [1938] HCA 34; (1938) 60
CLR 336).
41. The standard of proof required is set out in Kwesius and ACT
Health [2008] ACTDT 3 (paragraph [75]) as follows:
“In proceedings before the Tribunal the allegations of
discrimination made by the Complainant are required to be
proved to a proper standard based upon proper evidentiary
material (see De Domenico v Marshall (unreported)
[1999] ACTSC 1 (3 February 1999)). It is not necessary that the
allegations be proved beyond reasonable doubt but there must
be a comfortable degree of satisfaction that they have been
proved by evidence which is sufficiently robust to justify the
conclusion arrived at rather than inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony or indirect inferences (see Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34; (1938) 60 CLR 336).” (per M H Peedom, Deputy
President)
42. Hall J in Duhbihur v Transport Appeal Board [2005] NSWSC 811
at [63] said that, “the [Briginshaw] standard of proof, or more
particularly, its application varies according to the seriousness of the
matter in question. It has been said in relation to findings of criminal
conduct the subject of civil proceedings that findings in relation
thereto must be based on evidence that is strong and cogent. This
[AustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! merely reflects the principle that the nature of the issue necessarily
affects the process by which “reasonable satisfaction” is attained: see
Briginshaw (at 363)” (words in square brackets added).
43. To make this Tribunal to be “reasonably satisfied” of the
allegation, the complainant must have some evidence in favour of the
tLI complaint for the Tribunal to give the highest in its favour. As stated
in McCormack and Charles Sturt University [2008] ACTDT 4 (at
paragraph [41]), namely, “[i]n order for the complaint to be
substantiated there would need to be some evidence favourable to the
Complainant’s contentions which, taken at their highest in favour of
those contentions, would render them seriously arguable (see Legal
Aid Commissioner (ACT) & Ors v Grundy [1999] ACTSC 318).”
44. In regard to discrimination, the Complainant must establish the
causal link between the Respondent’s act or omission and the relevant
attribute of the Complainant under section 7 of the Act. I said in my
recent decision in Michael Firestone v Australian National University Must !!! Aust!Il AustLI AustLi
[2009] ACTDT 1 [at paragraph 177] (which case related to
discrimination on the ground of disability) as follows:
“It is not always easy to prove discrimination on the ground of
disability within the meaning of the Act to the “reasonable
satisfaction” of this Tribunal, in particular, with the
requirement to establish the causal link between the alleged act
or omission and the disability. While it is very difficult to know
the intention or motive of a person who is alleged to have
unlawfully discriminated against another, the Tribunal has the
responsibility to find the true reason principally on the basis of
the objectively ascertainable evidence presented to it.”
Issues
45. This Tribunal considered the following issues:
(1) Whether there were sexual harassment incidents alleged
by the Complainant.
(2) Whether the Respondent discriminated against, or
victimised, the Complainant because she had complained
to the Tuggeranong Rugby Union & Amateur Sports
Club.
Issue (1)
46. Two witnesses for the Complainant testified to having seen the
incident on 11 June 1996. Ms Deborah Terry said that she saw at
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! 7:30 pm by the dishwasher, the Respondent raised the Complainant’s
hair and kissed her on the neck. Ms Terry’s employment was
terminated by the Respondent allegedly because of her having wiped
her nose on her sleeve. She said that the Respondent took two extra
staff and reduced her shifts. It seemed that Ms Terry had some
disagreements with the Respondent as well.
47. Mr Kevin Gunton, who moved to Queensland in 1996, provided
a written statement (unsigned at that time) about the incident at the
request of the Complainant. In his evidence given to the Tribunal, he
stated that at 7:30 pm on 11 June 1996 he saw that by the
dishwasher the Respondent raised the Complainant’s hair and kissed
her neck and opened her vest and perved at her breasts, without
approval. Of course, the latter incident was not suggested by the
Complainant at any time before she gave evidence at the Tribunal.
48. Mr Gunton also stated that at about 9 pm closing time the
Respondent walked up to the Complainant and put his hands on her Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
shoulders and slipped on hand inside her pants and laughed.1 In
cross examination, Mr Gunton said that the latter incident did not
happen at 7:45 pm or 8 pm. There are some discrepancies there, but
the thrust of the “hand in the pants” incident, if I may describe it that
way, is still supported by him.
49. The Complainant in her evidence said that the Respondent
licked her neck and did not kiss. In her original complaint, she did
mention only about the incident of the Respondent putting his hands
down her pants but stated in the Tribunal about the other two
incidents.2 One other witness Ms Leisja Jordan said that other staff
mentioned few weeks after about the first incident.3
1 Proceedings of 9.2.99, pp.62 and 63.
2 Proceedings of 20.4.00, pp.8-10.
3 Ibid, p.42.
50. The Complainant stated that there were no incidents after
1 August 1996 – that is, after she signed the agreement following the
mediation conducted by the club. Under cross examination, she
denied that she took proceedings because of reduced shifts.4
51. Witnesses for the Respondent gave evidence generally about his
character and were not eye-witnesses to the alleged incidents. At the
same time, witnesses for the Complainant did not seem to have had
good relationship with the Respondent and it seems that they all had
grievances against him for various matters they said he had done
about them. Even though there was some inconsistency in the
evidence presented by the Complainant’s witnesses, they were not
substantial enough to detract from the general credibility of the
witnesses.
52. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! The fact that the purpose of the agreement the parties signed on
1 August 1996 was to settle the allegation of sexual harassment
points to the incident that the Complainant complained of, that is, the
fact that the Respondent was willing to take place in that mediation,
although not admitting that the incident occurred.
53. I regard the kissing incident and the joking incident, not as
separate acts of the sexual harassment, but rather giving the
ambience and the environment of which the touching underneath the
pants occurred.
54. I have, in this connection, had regard to the consequences of an
adverse finding against the Respondent. I agree with Hall J’s
statement in Duhbihur case [at 66] that “[a]n allegation of sexual
harassment plainly involves a serious allegation and the consequences
of an adverse finding against an employee ……. are potentially grave
indeed. Such a finding impugns the integrity and reputation of a
person subject to such a finding.” [Duhbihur case involved sexual Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
harassment by a fellow employee.]
55. In applying the objective standard to this evidence and the
evidence given by the eye-witnesses, the Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that the Respondent subjected the Complainant to sexual
harassment on the night of 11 June 1996, at least by the incident of
the Respondent putting his hand inside the underpants of the
Complainant. The other alleged sexual harassment incidents would
appear to be in the broader scope of the proven incident of “hand in
the pants”. Evidence presented by the Respondent does not disprove
the incident of 11 January 1996.
56. Therefore, the formal finding of the tribunal is that the
Respondent contravened section 59(1) of the Discrimination Act. The
4 Ibid, p. 49.
Complainant referred to section 58(1), which defines sexual
harassment. Section 59(1) is the one that gives grounds for the
finding of sexual harassment in employment.
57. However, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the Complainant’s
claim that she was the subject of jokes and other attempts at
humourous behaviour which may have been of a sexual nature from
the Respondent, was established. It seems that was very vague, and a
background issue. Evidence available before the Tribunal in relation
to that particular claim is not specific enough to give weight to it.
Issue (2)
58. As I said before, the Complainant had not alleged discrimination
or victimisation by the Respondent. The form of complaint to the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Human Rights Office, completed by the Complainant, included sexual
harassment and victimisation as the basis of discrimination and the
Complainant ticked them off. This Tribunal considers that the
evidence presented to it in relation to reduced shifts of work given to
the Complainant after she made the complaint to the Club, would
warrant consideration of whether the change in the shifts amounted
to discrimination or victimisation of the Complainant.
59. It is evident that the reason why the Complainant made the
complaint to the Human Rights Office was because she was given
reduced shifts after the agreement of 1 August 1996 and regarded
that as not providing her equal employment opportunity in terms of
the agreement. However, in the Tribunal proceedings the
Complainant denied that being the motive for the complaint.
60. From the evidence, the Tribunal finds that from August 1996,
the Complainant was given reduced shifts of work compared to other
staff. 5 The Respondent’s evidence was that all staff had reduced shifts Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
of work and this was due to downturn in his business. Eventually, a
short time later, he left Canberra in any event. He has not been really
seen or heard of since 2001.
61. The Complainant has not discharged the onus of proving to the
satisfaction of this Tribunal that the reduced shifts of work she was
given by the Respondent was discrimination against her. There must
be causative relationship for that specifically to occur. As I said
before, neither in her complaint to the Human Rights Office nor in her
Particulars filed with this Tribunal, had the Complainant specifically
alleged discrimination on account of reduced shifts. In fact, in her
evidence, she denied that that was the motivation she was using.
5 Ibid, p.62.
62. In relation to a discrimination claim, a Complainant must
establish that the Respondent treated or proposed to treat the
Complainant unfavourably because of the Complainant’s attribute
referred to in section 7 of the Act, or imposes or proposes to impose a
condition or requirement that has, or is likely to have, the effect of
disadvantaging the Complainant because of the Complainant’s
attribute (see, section 8(1) of the Act).
63. Sexual harassment is not a ground of discrimination under the
Act unless it amounts to discrimination on the ground of sex [see,
Hall v A & A Sheiban Pty Ltd [1989] FCA 72.] In the matter before me,
there is no issue of discrimination on that ground.
64. It appears from the Complainant’s response filed with the
Human Rights Office (T-document 11) that what prompted her to
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! move towards ceasing employment was the Respondent’s non-
cooperation in meeting with her to discuss certain issues. The issue
seemed to be a set up she suspected the Respondent arranged to
make her drink alcohol while on duty. There is no evidence to
support that it was a matter that she alleged.
65. The Respondent stated that the proposed meeting was to
discuss certain employment issues and that it was the Complainant
who had not turned up for the meeting. It is this event that she
seemed initially to regard as the breach of the agreement.
66. For the above reasons, I am satisfied that this event is not a
relevant issue for this Tribunal’s consideration.
67. There is no evidence presented to satisfy the Tribunal that the
Complainant was discriminated against on the ground of sex. There
is also no evidence to satisfy the Tribunal that she was victimised by
the Respondent, in particular, by being given reduced shifts because Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
of her having made a complaint against the Respondent to the
Tuggeranong Rugby Union & Amateur Sports Club. In my view, just
because the two things followed does not mean there is causative
relationship as required for discrimination of that sort to be
established.
Remedy sought
68. The Complainant’s submission dated 4 September 2000 sought
that pursuant to section 102(2)(b)(iii) of the Discrimination Act the
Tribunal make an order for compensation to be paid by the
Respondent to the Complainant.
69. The Complainant submitted that the Complainant suffered
physical distress such as migraines, vomiting and diarrhoea until she
left her employment at the Bistro. She also alleged that she was
confused and felt that her employer breached the trust.
70. The Complainant’s claim is that her main source of income was
from her shifts at the Bistro. She claimed her loss to be at least
$3120.00 for the six-month period following the incident. This was
said to be based on the loss of an average three-four hour shifts a
week for this period. She also submitted that she found other work in
the hospitality industry.
71. She also claimed costs.
72. No supporting expert evidence, such as medical history, was
presented to the Tribunal to substantiate physical and mental distress
the Complainant alleged she suffered. The Tribunal is not satisfied
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! that there is causative relationship in this case between her financial
loss and any discrimination or victimisation.
73. Giving the highest in favour of the evidence presented on behalf
of her in relation to the “hand in the pants” incident, the Tribunal is
prepared to accept that it was reasonable that the Complainant
suffered as a result of the incident. However, without proof, I am not
prepared to accept that her suffering was substantial.
74. The Complainant’s continued employment with the Respondent
after the event, albeit on reduced shifts, and the Respondent not
harassing her after the 1 August 1996 agreement demonstrate that
her distress would have been minimised.
75. With regard to awards of damages under anti-discrimination
laws, I stated in Almassey AND Omari and ACT Multicultural Council
Inc. [2008] ACTDT 2, as follows:
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLI AustLi
“39. In Hall v A & A Sheiban Pty Ltd & ors,[11] the full Federal
Court discussed the principles applicable to awards of damages
under anti-discrimination laws. French J stated that the
measure of damages was to be found in the words of the statute
and not through the principles applicable to damages in tort.
His Honour continued:[12]
It may be that while there are events for which the conduct
complained of is a sine qua non, they would not be recognised
in any practical sense as arising "by reason of" it. Exclusion
principles analogous to concepts of remoteness, and failure to
mitigate may then be seen to operate. In the end, however, these
are to be subsumed in a practical judgment of cause and effect.
40. Lockhart J took a similar approach to French J. His Honour
stated that it would be "difficult" and "unwise" to prescribe an
inflexible measure of damages in discrimination cases; "in
particular, to do so exclusively be reference to common law tests
in branches of the law that are not the same, though analogous
in varying degrees, with anti-discrimination law".[13]
Nevertheless, Lockhart J accepted that the measure of damages
in tort was the closest analogy and one that "in most foreseeable
cases" was a "sensible and sound" test:[14]
Generally speaking, the correct way to approach the assessment
of damages ... is to compare the position in which the
complainant might have been expected to be if the
discriminatory conduct had not occurred with the situation in
which he or she was placed by reason of the conduct of the
respondent.”
76. JAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! In Marshall, Margot and Discrimination Commissioner De
Domenico (Party Joined) [1998] ACTAAT 287, the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal took the view that “[w]hile the award of damages in
tort cases may provide a useful analogy, it must always be kept in
mind that the entitlement to compensation in discrimination cases
arises from the statute and the extent of damages must be governed
tLI by the language of the statute - Hall & Others V A & A Sheiban Pty
Ltd & Others.”
77. The views referred to in paragraphs 75 and 76 apply in relation
to the complaint of sexual harassment under the Act. I am prepared
to accept that the Complainant was subjected to embarrassment, pain
and suffering, and am prepared to order damages for that of $1,000 as
compensation for her loss and damage. That is in relation to hurt
feelings and things of that nature arising from the “hand in the pants”
incident of sexual harassment but is not in relation to economic loss.
The Tribunal, as I have said, is not satisfied with the claim for loss of
earnings. That claim is based on a loss from reduced shifts for an Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
expected period of six months. The Complainant has not
substantiated that the reduced shifts were because of her making the
complaint about the sexual harassment. It is obvious that the
business was on a downturn in any event.
78. Evidence presented by the Respondent testified to his good
character. Witnesses for the Complainant seemed to have had
strained relationship with the Respondent, but that did not avoid this
Tribunal giving weight to their evidence about an incident of sexual
harassment, which was to some extent supported by the agreement
the parties entered into.
79. The Tribunal cannot find that sexual harassment,
discrimination or victimisation was a reason for the Complainant
ceasing to leave work. She may have felt that she wanted to leave
work, but the causative element such as required is not there. Hence,
the Tribunal considers that the compensation it orders in
paragraph 82 below for her for the distress she is taken to have
suffered by the incident is adequate to reflect her damages.
80. In view of the above, the Tribunal orders that the parties bear
their own costs.
81. In this case, there was some evidence generally supporting the
Complainant’s contention, but basically related to the “hand in the
pants” incident. I have also found that the surrounding
circumstances of the kissing or licking on the neck, as the
Complainant described it, were background material not giving rise to
sexual harassment of a separate nature, but rather taken into
account in awarding the loss she suffered.
82. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! I order the Respondent pay $1,000 to the Complainant as
compensation for the loss and damage the Complainant suffered by
the Respondent’s sexual harassment. That is restricted to pain and
suffering and feelings. I specifically reject the Complainant’s
complaint that she was discriminated against and victimised by the
Respondent. I find that the fact that the Respondent reduced her
shifts of work allocated to her in view of her making a complaint
against the Respondent, is not substantiated.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
APPEARANCE DETAILS
FILE NO: DT 7 OF 1998
COMPLAINANT: SUELLEN PATERSON
RESPONDENT: PETER CLARKE
APPEARANCE: COMPLAINANT: Mr Warwick Baxter,
tLILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aus Baxter’s Lawyers
RESPONDENT: Mr J S Wilson,
Barker Gosling
TRIBUNAL MEMBER: MR R J CAHILL, PRESIDENT
DATES OF HEARING: 9 February 1999, 20 April 2000 and
23 March 2001
DATE OF DECISION: 3 August 2009