ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
CURTIS v PHILLIPS (Civil Dispute) [2020] ACAT 115
XD 683/2020
Catchwords: CIVIL DISPUTE – defamation – jurisdiction – place of
publication of online Facebook post – what imputations arise –
defences – truth – triviality – reasonable opinion – fair comment
– qualified privilege – comparative awards
Legislation cited: +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008 s 48
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002 ss 135, 136, 139A, 139B, 139D
Cases cited: Bleyer v Google Inc [2014] NSWSC 897
Browne v Dunn (1893) 6 R 67
CIC Australia Ltd v ACT Planning and Land Authority,
Mainore Pty Ltd and Anor [2013] ACTSC 96
Dow Jones and Company Inc v Gutnick [2002] HCA 56
Errington & Anor v ACT Planning and Land Authority [2019]
ACAT 47
Galovac Pty Limited v Australian Capital Territory [2010]
ACTSC 132
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways
(NSW) [1964] HCA 69
Lazarus v Azize [2015] ACTSC 344
Texts Cited: David Rolph, Defamation Law (Thompson Reuters Australia,
2015)
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Tribunal: Senior Member B Meagher SC
Date of Orders: 18 December 2020
Date of Reasons for Decision: 18 December 2020
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) XD 683/2020
BETWEEN:
LOUISE CURTIS
Applicant
AND:
SIMON PHILLIPS
Respondent
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
TRIBUNAL: Senior Member B Meagher SC
DATE: 18 December 2020
ORDER
The Tribunal orders that:
1. The respondent is to pay the applicant the sum of $10,159.50 by 12 February
2020 comprised of:
(a) $10,000 damages.
(b) $159.50 Tribunal filing fee. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
………………………………..
Senior Member B Meagher SC
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. Louise Curtis, an ACT resident, has made application to the Tribunal for
remedies for defamation alleged to have been published by Mr. Phillips. a
resident of South Australia on a Facebook page belonging to someone else and
labelled “PINK FROSTING ARE THIEVES THEY OWE ME OR PEOPLE I
KNOW MONEY”.
2. Ms. Curtis was, at the time of the post by Mr. Phillips, in effect, the proprietor
of the business known as Pink Frosting. This business conducts online sales but
is based in the ACT. She had purchased it sometime earlier and the Facebook
page was started prior to her acquisition. During the time of her interaction with
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Mr. Phillips she had sold the business but was still running it pending
finalisation of the sale.
3. The post complained of, was made on 5 March 2020. It consisted of words and
followed by a picture of women including the applicant and Melissa Doyle, a
well-known television identity. The words were as follows;
How can Melissa Doyle possibly associate herself with a person like
Louise Curtis.
Louise is thieving innocent hard working Australians praying that we will
all give up chasing her for a refund while in the middle of it all those who
miss out are actually our kids. We had no decorations for our little girls
1st birthday! My wife was stressed crazy having had zero communication
from their business re delivery instead we chased them up only to get
excuses like “bushfires have affected us” (that’s an insult to those who Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
really were impacted) and “our printer is broken”
I understand this is a private group but I am hoping somebody has a
connection like Melissa Doyle who can share the disgraceful truth about
this woman and her deceiving ways
I’d happily sit in front of a camera and share my story
4. At the hearing of the matter, Ms. Curtis represented herself. Ms. Noble of
Meyer Vandenberg represented Mr. Phillips. Evidence was given by the two
parties. Amber Phillips, who is married to Mr. Phillips, also gave evidence.
Ms. Curtis called two witnesses, Ms. Laws and Mr. Carden. Witness statements
of all were tendered.
5. There was some cross examination. There was no direct challenge to the truth of
what each witness said. The hearing was by a telephone connection and whilst
that has some challenges in assessing witnesses, I could see no reason not to
accept the truth of what each witness said. There was really no substantive
factual issue. There was some suggestion by the lawyer for Mr. Phillips that I
might be suspicious about aspects of the evidence by Ms. Curtis and I will
expressly refer to that. There was a discrepancy in detail between the evidence
of Ms. Curtis and of Ms. Phillips but Ms. Curtis readily agreed that the detail
provided by Ms. Phillips was correct and she had not had access to all the
paperwork at the time she made her statement.
The facts +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
6. Mr. and Ms. Phillips had a baby girl who was due to turn one on about
23 February 2020 and a birthday party for that date was planned. On 17 January
2020, from her home in South Australia, Ms. Phillips, calling herself Amber
Holmes (presumably her birth name) placed an order online for her daughter’s
birthday from the Pink Frosting business. She was unable to pay online as the
online payment method was unavailable and was told she would be contacted
by phone regarding payment.
7. She received a confirmation of the order the same date showing the order was
made at 6:23pm on a Friday. It noted the event date and listed the items ordered.
They were invitations, pennant flags and water bottle labels. The price including
delivery was $32.49 and included a discount of $52.49. It referred to a tracking Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
service and indicated the order would be dispatched and should take 10 days.
8. On 20 January 2020, she received an email from Pink Frosting saying they had
tried to call her to finalise the order. She rang the same day and spoke to
Ms. Curtis. She gave her credit card details and was told the order should arrive
in a week. The credit card didn’t work apparently and on 22 January 2020, she
got another email saying the card was said to have insufficient funds. She had
thought the card, which must have been a debit card, had already had the money
deducted and had moved surplus funds from the bank account, to which it was
attached, to savings but replied by email that she would put it back and it would
work. The money was debited to the bank account she held with Mr. Phillips the
same day and she got a confirmation note later in the evening from Pink
Frosting, telling her it was paid.
9. Nothing arrived, so Mr. Phillips emailed asking why, on 6 February, and
pointed out that the invitations were supposed to be sent out a week before. She
got no reply, so she wrote again on 13 February pointing out the invitations
were no longer of use.
10. She got back an email the same day saying the order would be sent early next
week. She replied saying don’t send the invitations, and asked for an
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! explanation and a partial refund for the invitations. As an aside, I am not sure
how much that should be as the invoice set out the full price then discounted it
but it was roughly one third of the order (about $11). By email of the same date,
Ms. Curtis apologised and said she would refund the price for the invitations.
No explanation for the delay was given.
11. On 14 February, Ms. Phillips thanked her and asked how the refund would be
done and whether her card details were needed for that. She got a reply the same
day saying they would refund back to the card.
12. The next Wednesday, 19 February (four days before the event), Ms. Phillips
emailed saying there was still no delivery and asking where it was. She received
back an email, the same day, saying the order cannot be filled as the printer was
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
not working and she would have the amount refunded. An apology for the
inconvenience was given.
13. Ms. Phillips was understandably unhappy, She immediately sent back an email
saying:
Why did you not communicate this earlier I fot told late last week it
would be sent early this week and I've had to again email to follow up
and now 6 weeks later after my order your telling me your printer
isn't working and will give me a refund, wow ive never had such bad
customer service ever before. I understand things happen but
communication is key for keeping your customers in the loop I've had
to send multiple emails whth still no reasons behind why the order
was so frayed now 6 weeks later and 3 days before our event your
telling me your printer isn't working and will refund me... where does
that leave me... it is way to late for me to organise personalised
decorations for my daughters first birthday. If you advised me a week
or so ago when I first asked what was going on I could have
organised something else. I'm extremely disappointed in your
customer service and communication. I will be following up re my
refund and if I don't see it within the next day I will be contacting you
Regards Amber Phillips
[errors in original]
14. She chased up the refund, as she promised, on 3 March, and was sent a refund
notice on 12 March at 12.55pm. The notice was generated by an app, called
“Squareup” which had also done the original invoice. The amount didn’t get
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
back into the account until 23 March.
15. Ms. Curtis did not challenge this evidence and in her evidence volunteered that
she agreed that the service provided to Ms. Phillips was poor.
16. The post by Mr. Phillips was on 5 March 2020 which was after the agreement to
refund but before it was received.
17. Ms. Phillips was sent a ‘Notice of Concerns’ document requesting an apology
for the post. Later, after no apology was provided, she was told that proceedings
were being commenced. She explains how the late notice caused her a
considerable amount of emotional distress. She does not make any statement
that implied that Ms. Curtis wasn’t going to refund the money.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
18. Mr. Phillips in his statement says that his wife rang him on 19 February and was
emotionally distraught at the cancellation of the order. She had to rush around at
the last minute to get party supplies. On 28 February he was told by his wife
that the refund had not come through. He was shown the emails between
Ms. Phillips and Pink Frosting. He was given a mobile number for the business
and tried, unsuccessfully, to contact it by phone a number of times between
28 February and 4 March. He sent two emails following it up on 4 March. He
referred to the Order Number but used his first name and did not mention his
wife’s name. If the emails were followed up the order might have been
identified by the number but as Ms. Curtis said, she did not know who Simon
Phillips was when she first saw the matter complained of.
19. Mr. Phillips then did a Google search the next day and was shocked to see a
number of complaints about the business on a site called
www.productsreviews.com.au.
20. He annexed them to his statement. They contain a number of disparaging
comments accusing the business of being a scam and worse. He was shocked.
The complaints were similar to what had happened to Ms. Phillips and related to
being let down for planned events by last minute cancellations and difficulty in
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! getting a timely or any refund. Some went further and asserted the business was
a scam. There are 14 pages of this.
21. It should be pointed out that ACAT, in its civil jurisdiction, is not bound by the
rules of evidence. Nonetheless these complaints are hearsay. To the extent that
they informed Mr. Phillips in guiding his actions which may be relevant to a
defence, they are not reliable proof of the truth of what they say.
22. On the same day, 5 March, Mr. Phillips discovered a Facebook page which is
the one where he posted the comment, which is the subject of these proceedings.
He joined the group so he could do so. He did not know Ms. Doyle and did not
explain where he found the picture, but it can easily be found on the internet,
when searching images of Ms. Curtis.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
23. On 12 March he saw the refund notice. He then removed his comment. He
didn’t receive the Notice of Concerns and first became aware of it when shown
it by his wife on 22 June. He suggested that the timing of the refund and the
Concerns Notice the next day is interesting. In her closing address his solicitor
made a similar comment. She had cross examined witnesses for the applicant
about the timing of when they first saw the post by Mr. Phillips. At the time I
did not know why that was being asked. As will be seen the evidence was that
Ms. Curtis did not become aware of the post until the morning of 13 March. It
was not put to her or her witnesses that they were not truthful about that or that
the timing of the refund was after she became aware of the post. As lawyers
well know, the rule in Browne v. Dunn requires this, if the contrary is to be
asserted.1 Whilst this is a rule of evidence, it is based on fairness which the
Tribunal is obliged to afford. Thus, there is no proper basis here for finding
anything but that the refund predated knowledge of the post. In any event, as I
have previously said, I found all the witnesses to be truthful.
24. Mr Phillips also annexed a lot of internet references to Ms Curtis which he says
reflects her reputation. Some of the material is disparaging and some is
supportive. Again, this is not evidence of their truth either way.
25. Ms. Curtis in her statement, that she had affirmed to be true, says she was the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! owner of the business Pink Frosting but sold it to a competitor in January. The
completion of the sale was not until March, and during January it had a sale
with 70% off to clear existing stocks. The business sold party supplies and
personalised confectionery.
26. After receiving the order a number of misfortunes plagued the business. Its
premises were in Fyshwick. On Monday 20 January, a freak storm hit the
premises causing hail damage to cars of staff and to the building. The business
closed until 22 January but then had to close again the same day due to a
bushfire known as the Beard fire. Power was cut off and the business could not
reopen until the next week. This put them even further behind in processing
existing as well as new orders. Then the main printer broke down. It appears to
be necessary to make the labels and other products being provided. The Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
repairers could not access the site for some time due to the fire and smoke
emergency. Ms. Curtis told Ms. Phillips about the printer on 14 February. Her
statement has missed a bit of the history related by Ms. Phillips and she agreed
that Ms. Phillips was right about it. The business struggled to get on top of
administration due to the two week disruption at the end of January and this also
led to delays in consequent refunds. She said the refund was processed on 10
March but the paperwork evidencing it is dated 12 March. She said in evidence
that the app Squareup that they used was very slow and she no longer uses it.
The differences in these dates was not explored and I will assume it was
1 Browne v Dunn (1893) 6 R 67, at pages 76-77
actually 12 March that the refund was initiated. In cross examination. Ms. Curtis
explained that since the business was sold, she no longer has access to the
paperwork although she does have access to the financial records she had
generated.
27. On 5 March the Facebook page of the business received a number of posts from
the respondent saying the business was a scam. Ms. Curtis did not know who
the respondent was, so had these posts deleted. On the same day, he posted the
matter complained of on a different Facebook page. She did not know of this
until later. The post included a photo of Melissa Doyle with a number of women
including Ms. Curtis. Ms. Doyle was tagged. Ms. Doyle is a well-known
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! television personality and a member of the Board of the GWS Giants AFL team
as well as its number one ticketholder. Ms. Curtis says that this then exposed the
comment to Ms. Doyle’s many friends or followers on Facebook. She put that
number at 15,000. There is no direct evidence of this, but it is safe to assume
that it would be a significant number.
28. It should be noted that the tagging does not necessarily mean that all these
followers will see the post. Ms. Noble, acting for the respondent, tendered an
extract about tagging as part of an application to dismiss the claim. She relied
on it in the substantive hearing. I accept her explanation that it may need some
action by Ms. Doyle to make it available to all her followers. It can be seen on
the Facebook page that Ms. Doyle did log into the page and posted something
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
on it. I cannot read it as it is too small. However, apparently, this inadvertently
makes the post more widely known to her followers. I cannot be certain as to
how many could have seen it, but it is potentially as wide as the number of
followers of Ms. Doyle. Ms. Doyle had asked why she was being dragged into
this. Ms. Curtis was asked by Ms. Doyle what it was about causing her
significant embarrassment.
29. Ms. Curtis first became aware of the post when the Canberra Operations
Manager of the Giants, Jack Masters rang her on the morning of 13 March.
According to Ms. Curtis, he was extremely concerned and told her that while
they “loved her” she was too much of a liability to continue in her public role
with the Giants. Not long after this her longtime friend Ms. Laws, who had seen
the post the night before, rang her to warn her. Ms. Laws says Ms. Curtis was
crying and told her she had just found out.
30. In her statement Ms. Curtis explained that she had been an inaugural member of
a women’s supporter group for the Giants in Canberra and had been an
ambassador for them. In her oral evidence she explained also that she had
attended many public functions for the team and spoke regularly on radio for
them. She had thought she may be asked to join its Board. The Giants had an
office in Canberra and Mr. Masters was based here. She said she had always
loved AFL and was instrumental in getting a large group of prominent Canberra
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! women together to support the team. The Group is known as the Giant Hearts.
She had been approached by the AFL to assist in this being used for other
teams.
31. As previously mentioned, Ms. Doyle, whom she had met several times, wanted
to know why she was being dragged into this. At this time Ms. Curtis still did
not know who Mr. Phillips was. Ms. Curtis spoke with her lawyer, Mr. Carden,
the same day and he knew. Mr. Carden gave evidence that he was a follower of
the Port Adelaide AFL team and he knew of Mr Phillips as he had played for
that team. He was able to identify Ms. Philips as his wife and the connection
became apparent. Later the same day Mr. Carden, who had downloaded the
post, sent a Notice of Concerns letter to Mr. Phillips – although it wasn’t
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
received.
32. Ms. Curtis wrote again before commencing proceedings asking for an apology
and Mr. Phillips did get that. No apology has been given.
33. Ms. Curtis explained that the business filled 25,432 orders in 2019, had been in
operation for 17 years and was a substantial firm. She bought the business in
2016 when it had been at a low ebb and had hoped to get it back to a thriving
business. She had to let a lot of former staff go and at that time the Facebook
page had already been started. She found she had to refund substantial sums in
respect of money received by the former owner. She said a number of the
people making comments online were not actually her customers and some, she
believed, were disgruntled former staff.
34. She owns a number of businesses in Canberra and had twice been Telstra
businesswoman of the year in the ACT and had won other accolades. She said
her reputation had been damaged irreparably.
35. She explained that if she had received an apology she may not have sued. She
felt the use of the photo and the tagging of Ms. Doyle was malicious and that
was what made if different from the other bloggers who she was not suing.
What has affected her most was the embarrassment she felt with the Giants and
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! the loss of her role with them that she was proud of and enjoyed.
36. She did not seek to expand on any other hurt she suffered, but her friend
Ms. Laws did. The only reason Ms. Laws and Mr. Carden gave evidence was to
meet an argument that there was no jurisdiction in the ACT as there was no
assertion in pleadings or statements provided showing the matter had been
downloaded in the ACT as is required. 2 Ms. Laws had been worried about how
she had been coping mentally with what she described as trolling. When she
saw the post by Mr. Phillips, she was concerned about her and when she rang,
Ms. Curtis was crying. To her credit, Ms. Curtis did not seek to put herself
forward as a person that might be so affected but rather gave the impression that
she was a strong person and could cope. The loss of her Giants role was what
hurt her most. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
The ‘pleading’ and applications
37. As is common in this jurisdiction, the application and response were not crafted
as pleadings might be in a superior Court. Subsequently, both parties filed
documents that followed a more familiar pleading path. The document filed by
the applicant, for which she must have had legal help, was called an “amended
pleading”. It described the publication as on the internet and did not expressly
plead any material facts that established it had been downloaded or that it had
been done in the ACT. Its description of the aspects of the matter that were
2 Dow Jones and Company Inc v Gutnick [2002] HCA 56
defamatory may have been a bit contentious. The word ‘imputations’ did not get
mentioned. It referred instead to implications, which I have taken to be the same
thing. The use of the word thief was said to imply that she was engaged in
criminal activity during the ordinary course of her business dealings. It was also
said that the publication “expressly implied’ (sic) that the applicant was
untrustworthy and deceitful.
38. Whilst the word ‘thief’ was used, an ordinary reader may see that some
hyperbole was involved in this description and it is debatable that this would be
seen as criminal in nature. However there can be no doubt that it carries the
imputation that in her business dealings she is untrustworthy and deceitful.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! It is clear that the sting of the matter was that she was a dishonest person and
someone that was an undesirable person for Ms. Doyle to associate with.
39. The claim sought damages, an apology and costs.
40. On the Wednesday before the hearing on Friday, an application to dismiss the
case was made. It attacked the pleading, asserted that the Tribunal lacked
jurisdiction to hear the case and argued the case should be dismissed as it was a
waste of resources, relying on Bleyer v Google Inc [2014] NSWSC 897.
41. I dismissed the application for reasons given at the time. They included that the
Tribunal was not a court of pleading and section 7 of the ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2008 required the proceedings to be dealt with as
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
cheaply fairly and expeditiously as possible. The document was enough to make
it clear what was being asserted. There was evidence that enabled an arguable
case for jurisdiction, 3 and it was far too late to rely on the Bleyer principle as the
resources were already committed.
42. The amended response pleaded a number of defences, namely, truth at common
law and pursuant to sections 135 and 136 of the Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
(the Act) qualified privilege at common law and under section 139A of the Act;
3 referring to Errington & Anor v ACT Planning and Land Authority [2019] ACAT 47; General Steel
Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW) [1964] HCA 69 and Galovac Pty Limited v
Australian Capital Territory [2010] ACTSC 132
fair comment and honest opinion relying on section 139B of the Act and
triviality under section 139D of the Act.
Consideration
43. The post clearly contains statements that would tend to make readers think less
of Ms. Curtis. There is a clear imputation that she is dishonest. This is
defamatory. The evidence discloses that a number of people in the ACT had
read it and it was clearly downloaded here. The law assumes the statements are
false unless proven otherwise. Therefore, unless a defence relied on succeeds,
Mr. Phillips is liable to Ms. Curtis.
Triviality +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
44. The triviality defence was asserted as more significant than the others. As was
correctly submitted, this related to injury to reputation not to feelings. It was
argued that the readers were few, many of them rightly or not, already had a dim
view of the reputation of Ms. Curtis; the people identified as downloading it in
the ACT namely Ms. Laws and Mr. Carden did not believe it for a second, it
was not on long and was removed.
45. The contrary argument is that the most significant persons in the ACT who
knew of it were the staff of the Giants in Canberra. The post as impacted on
Ms. Curtis greatly because the Giants would not want to be seen to associate
with her. She has not been told that they believed the material but its existence
leaves them unable to be publicly associated with her. I am satisfied that this Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
post has impacted on her reputation with the Giants and this was significant for
her. The defence of triviality fails.
Truth
46. The defence of truth was not the subject of any submissions. Aggravated
damages that can arise from a failed defence of truth were not asked for and
considering the short period since the pleading and the low profile given to this
defence, I don’t see they would be appropriate. There was no admissible
evidence that Ms Curtis was dishonest. The experience of Mr. and Mrs. Phillips
was evidence that her business gave them unsatisfactory service and that they
were understandably upset by it. If Mr. Phillips had confined his post to being
critical of the service this would have been defensible, but he went further. He
might be excused for fearing the worst when he read all the disparaging
remarks, but his experience did not warrant him calling her a thief or deceitful
or a person that Ms. Doyle should not associate with.
Fair comment and honest opinion
47. The defences of fair comment (at common law) and honest opinion depend on
them being based on proper material under section 139B (5) or facts that are
true. The material would have to be substantially true. This has not been shown.
As explained above, the material might justify adverse comments about the poor
service on this occasion but falls well short of verifying the truth of the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! imputations regarding deliberate dishonesty.
Qualified privilege
48. It is fair to conclude that Mr. Phillips had been angry with Ms. Curtis. The
email Mrs. Phillips typed when told there were to be no goods, at the last
minute, was an angry one. All her other emails were properly spelt and written.
This must have been written quickly. It is reasonable for her to have been so
upset. It is also very understandable why Mr. Phillips was totally dissatisfied
and why the shock of what he saw online may have led him to jump to the
conclusion that Ms. Curtis was operating a scam.
49. Ms. Curtis describes sourcing a photo and tagging Ms. Doyle as malicious.
Malice is a term of art in defamation law. It defeats the defence.4 I do not intend Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
to articulate what is meant by it here but it is explained in the text David Rolph,
Defamation Law (Thompson Reuters Australia, 2015) at [11.80]. It is arguable
that the post was actuated by anger and to do Ms. Curtis harm and not by
seeking to advance the public interest.
50. I still have to be persuaded that placing a post on a Facebook page that has such
an extreme title, describing the applicant as a thief and making sure Ms Doyle
and thus in all likelihood her wider followers (who have never dealt with the
applicant or have any interest in knowing about her) is reasonable. It would be
4 see too section 139A(4)
reasonable to write to the Fair Trading Authority or an equivalent body with a
complaint. It seems highly unlikely that posting it to fellow complainants adds
much to the public interest, but arguably it does. Tagging Ms. Doyle seems
egregious. As she said, why am I being dragged into this? Assuming that there
is otherwise an occasion of privilege it does not extend to the communication to
Ms. Doyle of the followers of Ms. Doyle. This defence was not argued seriously
by Ms. Noble and I am not satisfied it is made out.
51. I have come to the conclusion that the matter complained of was published in
the ACT, bore a defamatory imputation that Ms. Curtis was untrustworthy and
deceitful in her business dealings and was not justified by any of the pleaded
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! defences.
Remedies
5
52. Apologies are not ordered in defamation cases.
53. Costs are not available except as expressly set out in section 48(2) of the ACT
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008. 6
7
54. The filing fee may be ordered.
55. The only available remedy is damages.
56. Ms. Noble helpfully drew my attention to some comparable awards in Lazarus v
Azize [2015] ACTSC 344 (Lazarus v Azize). 8 There, the range for small
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
circulation cases ranged from $3,000-$18,750.
57. An important object of an award, in the absence of a public apology, is
vindication. Ms. Curtis has clearly also suffered a degree of harm to her feelings
but she has not made a point of it. She seems to have been so harmed already by
what her friend Ms. Laws describes as trolling. The only reason she brought
these proceedings was because of the unnecessary dragging in of the Giants via
Ms. Doyle. If she obtains an award that reflects vindication, she may be put in
5 see Rolph at 17.10
6 CIC Australia Ltd v ACT Planning and Land Authority, Mainore Pty Ltd and Anor [2013] ACTSC 96
7 ACAT Act section 48(2)(a)(i)
8 at [33]
the position that she would have been if the post had not been published so far
as her reputation was concerned. An apology may have had the same effect. The
extent of the publication is not known. It may be wider than thought but it is
unlikely that many outside the Giants community or a small number of readers
of the site before it was removed would know about it. The users of the
Facebook page may already have had an adverse opinion of the applicant or
read it with a degree of scepticism. It is reasonable to treat it as having relatively
limited relevant circulation. It is important not to award a sum that might be
seen as derisory, without overcompensating the applicant. The amended
pleading seeks $15,000. The jurisdiction is limited to $25,000. As Associate
Justice Mossop, as he then was, said in Lazarus v Azize at [34]:
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Plainly enough, …a comparative exercise is overly simplistic in that it
pays no regard to the particular circumstances of each case or whether or
not those circumstances are comparable to the circumstances alleged in
the present case. However it is clear that the damages awards, while
modest, are not trivial.
58. In all the circumstances, I have concluded that a fair amount is $10,000.
59. I have not enjoyed making this order against Mr. Phillips. He and his wife both
presented as likable people and, as I have set out, were understandably upset at
their treatment in their dealings with the applicant.
60. I was also impressed by Ms. Curtis for a number of different reasons. Her
motivation for bringing the action at all was not to obtain any large sum but to Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
get an apology. I was not surprised when Ms. Laws, who presented as a very
sensible person, thought the claims made about Ms. Curtis were nonsense. It is
hard to believe that a successful businesswoman who continues to run other
businesses in the ACT would deliberately sacrifice her reputation by dishonestly
holding on to relatively small amounts of money. She readily accepted that the
Philips had received bad service. She readily conceded a number of propositions
that she may have contested. She did not seek to elicit sympathy by talking
about her emotional response when she was told of the post.
61. The orders I make are:
1. The respondent is to pay the applicant the sum of $10,000 damages
2. The respondent is to pay the applicant the sum of $159.50 for the ACAT
filing fee.
………………………………..
Senior Member B Meagher SC
Date(s) of hearing 27 November 2020
Applicant: In person
Solicitors for the Ms C Noble, Meyer Vandenberg Lawyers
Respondent: +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi