ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ILLAWARRA RETIREMENT TRUST ACN 000 726 536 v
COMMISSIONER FOR ACT REVENUE (Administrative Review)
[2020] ACAT 103
AT 52/2020
Catchwords: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW – subpoenas – application for
subpoenas to be set aside – whether documents required to be
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! produced under subpoenas lack a legitimate forensic purpose –
whether subpoenas are a ‘fishing expedition’ – whether
subpoenas are oppressive in the circumstances – scope of
subpoenas in the Tribunal – test of relevance – documents which
“on the cards” will materially assist – where subpoenas in the
Tribunal can act as a de facto discovery process pursuant to
objects of the ACAT Act
Legislation cited: ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008 ss 6, 7, 23,
56
Rates Act 2004 s 8
Taxation Administration Act 1999 s 99
Subordinate
Legislation cited: ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Procedures Rules
2020 r 130
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Cases cited: Alister v R (“Hilton Bombing case”) [1984] HCA 85
Canberra Cleaners Pty Limited & Ors v Commissioner for
ACT Revenue [2017] ACTSC 197
Drake and Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (No 2)
(1979) 2 ALD 634
FANDS (ACT) Pty Ltd v Commissioner for ACT Revenue
[2017] ACAT 65
Holloway v State of Victoria [2015] VSC 526
Instyle Estate Agents Gungahlin Pty Ltd v Hambrook [2020]
ACTSC 293
Investments and Minister for Planning [2003] ACTAAT 29
Peter Kohnsdorf Golf Distributors Pty Ltd & Liangis
Investments Pty Ltd and Minister for Planning [2003]
ACTAAT 29
R v Robertson [1983] 21 NTR 11
R v Saleam (1989) 16 NSWLR 14
R v Saleam [1999] NSWCCA 86
Santos Ltd & Ors v Pipelines Authority of SA [1996] SASC
5628
State of Victoria v Lane & Anor [2012] VSC 328
Young Men’s Christian Association Inc & ACT Planning and
Land Authority & Ors [2011] ACAT 78
List of
Texts/Papers cited: Australian Government, Attorney-General’s Department
Access to Justice Taskforce, A Strategic Framework for
Access to Justice in the Federal Civil Justice System (2009)
Tribunal: Presidential Member H Robinson
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Date of Orders: 20 November 2020
Date of Reasons for Decision: 7 December 2020
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL AT 52/2020
BETWEEN:
ILLAWARRA RETIREMENT TRUST ACN 000 726 536
Applicant
AND:
COMMISSIONER FOR ACT REVENUE
Respondent
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
TRIBUNAL: Presidential Member H Robinson
DATE: 20 November 2020
ORDER
The Tribunal orders that:
1. The Interim Application is dismissed.
2. Immediate access to both parties to inspect, uplift, copy and photocopy
the material produced under subpoenas (b) and (c).
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
3. The Return of Subpoena for subpoena (a) is adjourned to 10:00am on
Tuesday 8 December 2020.
4. The matter is listed for further directions at 9:00am on Monday 14
December 2020.
5. The directions 3 to 9 made on 21 August 2020 are vacated.
…………………Signed……………..
Presidential Member H Robinson
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. By way of an interim application, the respondent sought to set aside and/or
object to production and inspection of documents produced under subpoenas
issued to three ACT Government entities, on the grounds that they have no
legitimate forensic purpose, are a ‘fishing expedition’ and that they are
oppressive.
2. I delivered an oral decision on 20 November 2020. These are my reasons.
The subpoenas
3. On 9 October 2020 the applicant requested three subpoenas be issued by the
Tribunal to:
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
(a) The Proper Officer, Commissioner for Revenue (the Commissioner);
(b) The Proper Officer, Access Canberra Land Titles Office (LTO); and
(c) The Proper Officer, ACT Environment, Planning and Sustainable
Development Directorate (EPSDD).
4. The subpoenas as issued were very broad in scope and sought a range of
documents relating to the ownership, development and rates assessments of a
number of properties (the specified properties) used for retirement villages or
aged care facilities.
5. By the time of the hearing of the interim application the scope of the subpoena
to the Commissioner had been narrowed considerably, and the applicant only Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
pressed the subpoenas in relation to the following documents:
(a) Pursuant to subpoena (a), issued to the Commissioner, in relation to the
list of specified properties:
(i) the conveyance duty assessment notice (and any applicable re-
assessment notices) issued to the current lessee;
(ii) all rates assessment notices issued to the current Crown lessee for
the period 1 July 2017 to date; and
(iii) any applicable rates exemption notices issued to the current Crown
lessee.
(b) In relation to subpoena (b), issued to the LTO, in relation to a specified
list of properties:
(i) the current Crown lease.
(ii) the most recent contract for sale.
(iii) the most recent registered transfer form,
(iv) any development applications submitted by the current Crown
lessee.
(c) In relation to subpoena (c), issued to EPSDD in relation to a list of
specified properties:
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! (i) the current Crown lease.
(ii) the most recent contract for sale.
(iii) the most recent registered transfer form,
(iv) any development applications submitted by the current Crown
lessee.
6. The respondent did not seek to set aside or object to access to documents
produced under subpoena (b) and (c) so far as they related to items (d), i.e. the
development applications submitted by the current Crown lessee in relation to
the subject properties.
Background
7. By way of these proceedings the applicant, Illawarra Retirement Trust, seeks a
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
review of a decision made by the respondent to disallow an objection (the
objection) to a rates assessment notice dated 20 February 2020 for a property
(the subject property) it owns at Block 1 Section 72 Denman Prospect.
8. The applicant contends that the respondent erred in disallowing its objection
because the property is not rateable for the purposes of the Rates Act 2004
(Rates Act) as it is land that is leased to a charitable organisation and used
exclusively for education, benevolent or charitable purposes, bringing it within
an exception in section 8(1)(b)(iii) of the Rates Act.
9. Section 8(1)(b)(iii) of the Rates Act provides that:
Land leased to charitable organisations and used exclusively for
religious, educational, benevolent or charitable purposes.
10. The only matter in dispute in the substantive proceedings is whether the subject
property is used for charitable purposes, and in particular whether the land will
be:
(a) “used” for a charitable purpose; and
(b) used “exclusively” for a charitable purpose.
11. The applicant intends to develop the land to be used for a 130 unit retirement
village and 90 aged care units. However, it also intends the development to
include +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! a childcare centre, café/restaurant, hairdresser, beautician and
physiotherapist (the ancillary uses).
12. The respondent’s decision to disallow the objection is partly premised on the
determination that the ancillary uses are commercial in nature, and accordingly
the premises is not used exclusively for charitable purposes.
Legitimate forensic purpose
13. The Tribunal can set aside a subpoena that has no legitimate forensic purpose.
14. Whether a subpoena has a legitimate forensic purpose is determined by a two
stage test:1
(a) Has the applicant identified a legitimate forensic purpose for which access
is sought? Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
(b) Has the applicant established that it is ‘on the cards’ that the documents
sought will materially assist his or her case?
15. The first stage of the test requires the party seeking the subpoena to expressly
state its purpose. In this case, the applicant has identified two purposes.
16. First, the applicant says, the subpoenas will demonstrate what kind of services
are presently being offered in comparable facilities, with a view to establishing
what is an ‘ancillary use’ linked to charitable use of the property. Evidence
1 Alister v R [1984] HCA 85; R v Saleam (1989) 16 NSWLR 14; R v Saleam [1999] NSWCCA 86 at
[11] (Spigelman CJ, Simpson and Studdert JJ agreeing)
showing that other, similar establishments provide similar services may assist in
proving that the services are ‘ancillary’. Senior Counsel for the applicant
submitted that:
…the use of land also includes a certain penumbra of ancillary uses. And
ancillary uses are treated as not different uses, but are in fact part of the
substantive use for which the property is devoted. Therefore, to use a
common example, if you happen to have a fish and chip shop and put a
pinball machine in the fish and chip shop, you don't either convert the
entire fish and chip shop, or for that matter even the area upon which the
pinball machine stands, into a place of entertainment by virtue of
including it in the fish and chip shop. 2
17. Senior Counsel for the applicant referred to two previous cases of the Tribunal,
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Peter Kohnsdorf Golf Distributors Pty Ltd & Liangis Investments Pty Ltd and
Minister for Planning [2003] ACTAAT 29 (Kohnsdorf) and Young Men’s
Christian Association Inc & ACT Planning and Land Authority & Ors [2011]
ACAT 78 (YMCA v ACTPLA) as providing support for the contention that
ancillary use is regarded as being part of the substantive use, rather than a
separate use. In Kohnsdorf, the Tribunal looked to what activities were being
undertaken in other golf establishments to determine whether these activities
were treated as ancillary,3 observing at paragraph 67 of the decision that:
…the nature of the activities undertaken in the pro shop/showroom is
closely related to the dominant use is apparent not only from the nature of
the goods sold but also from the fact that all of the golf courses in
Canberra have a facility for selling the same products.
18. The second purpose was to address the question of consistency. This argument Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
took two forms. First, at least in its written submissions, the respondent
contended that the subpoenaed documents may demonstrate the consistency or
arbitrariness of the respondent’s decision making. In support of those
submissions, the applicant cites the observations of Brennan J in Drake and
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (No 2) (1979) 2 ALD 634 that “one
of the factors to be considered in arriving at the preferable decision in a
particular case is its consistency with other decisions in comparable cases.” 4
The applicant also notes section 6(e) and (f) of the ACT Civil and
2 Transcript of proceedings 12 November 2020 page 7, lines 6-10
3 Kohnsdorf at [60] to [67]
4 Drake and Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (No 2) (1979) 2 ALD 634, 643
Administrative Tribunal Act 2008, which states that the objects of the Tribunal
include to enhance the quality of and encourage compliance with decision
making under legislation.
19. A second aspect of the consistency argument was advanced in oral argument at
the hearing:
…we do not yet know what evidence may be called by the Commissioner
and it is at least possible that somebody will say that this is not
appropriate to be regarded as charitable or for this reason there is too
much of this, what might be viewed as or asserted to being, extraneous
activity and in the cross-examination of such a person it may well be that
what the Commissioner has done elsewhere may be relevant to the cross
examination of that person.5
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
20. In other words, as well as consistency being relevant to the decision itself, it is
contended that consistency may be “relevant to any evidence given by a
particular witness.” 6
21. In response to the application the respondent submitted that the questions in the
substantive hearing turn exclusively on a legal construction of subsection
8(1)(b)(iii) of the Rates Act. The proper construction of the Rates Act must be
determined by reference to the text of the Act only, and evidence as to the
application of the Rates Act to other retirement or aged care facilities is an
irrelevant consideration. Counsel for the respondent submitted that:
…as far as the Commissioner can identify, the purpose of the subpoena is
not to produce material to assist the Tribunal to reach the correct and
preferable decision in accordance with law…it is to assert the tribunal Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
should make a decision despite the meaning of the terms of the Act and the
application of the facts of this case to the Act.7
22. The respondent further says that statements as to the desirability of consistency
in decision-making have no possible application in a case such as this, as they
cannot negate the Tribunal’s statutory function to make the correct and
preferable decision according to law. Consideration of whether the decision
under review is consistent with other decisions would be in error.
5 Transcript of proceedings 12 November 2020 page 9, lines 33-39
6 Transcript of proceedings 12 November 2020 page 10, line 10
7 Transcript or proceedings 12 November 2020 page 4, lines 21-28
23. I agree with the respondent that this is not a matter where consistency, in the
sense of consistent decision making, can play a role in determining whether the
correct and preferable decision was made. Consistency would be a consideration
were this matter to involve, for example, a review of an exercise involving
multiple decision makers and broad discretion, but this is not such a case.
24. However, it is possible that evidence as to consistency of decisions may be
relevant in other ways. Assuming that evidence demonstrating what kinds of
activities are typically undertaken in nursing homes is relevant to the
substantive matter, evidence about the circumstances where those activities
have been treated differently by decision makers in relation to rates and duties
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! may show what, if anything, has changed in the industry, or provide a basis for
cross examination on related questions about what is an ancillary use.
25. I do not need to be satisfied of the consistency argument, however. I am
satisfied that there is a legitimate forensic purpose in identifying what activities
are undertaken by other nursing homes and retirement villages in order to
determine what activities may be ancillary to the charitable use of the land,
consistent with the approach taken in in Kohnsdorf.
26. Turning to the documents being sought, a subpoena has a legitimate forensic
purpose if there is a reasonable possibility that the document sought will
materially assist the party.8 Mere speculation that the documents would assist is
not sufficient, as this would amount to ‘fishing’, and nor is mere relevance,9 but Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
I do not need to be satisfied that the documents will assist the applicant’s case,
only that they may.10 This involves consideration of what the documents could
add to the proceeding.
27. In terms of the exploration of ancillary purposes, the development applications
will doubtlessly be the most relevant. The respondent does not object to the
production of those in relation to the specified properties.
8 Alister v R [1984] HCA 85
9 Alister v R [1984] HCA 85; State of Victoria (Department of Justice) v Lane & Anor [2012] VSC 328 at
[19]-[20]; Holloway v State of Victoria [2015] VSC 526 at [51]
10 Alister v R [1984] HCA 85
28. I am satisfied that the Crown leases are relevant to determining whether services
provided in other establishments are provided as ‘ancillary services’ or in
accordance with broader purpose clauses. This question of whether property
may be able to be used for multiple activities would be relevant were it to be
contended that certain ‘ancillary’ activities undertaken on specified properties
are merely alternative uses of the land, or that certain activities may not be
charitable at all.
29. The forensic purpose for which the other documents are sought under the
subpoenas is more tenuous and involves a few jumps. However, I am satisfied
rates assessment notices and exemption notices may (and I would not put it
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! higher than that) materially affect a question before the tribunal, being what
could presently be considered an ancillary use. The documents may also be
relevant to cross examination as to the differences between the services offered
in different retirement villages or nursing homes over time.
30. Having regard to these considerations, I am satisfied that the subpoenas serve a
legitimate forensic purpose.
‘Fishing’, de facto discovery and oppression
31. The respondent submits that the subpoenas constitute a ‘fishing’ exercise, as
they are intended not to obtain evidence, but to discover whether the applicant
has a case at all – effectively, the applicant has asked for the subpoena to be
issued in the hope of finding something relevant, rather than to obtain Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
documents or evidence that may ‘throw light’11 on an existing question.
32. I am not satisfied that one can put the situation quite so broadly. The exercise is
not a blind one, aimed at digging up a case. The applicant filed and relied on a
statement filed by a solicitor, Ms Kosa, in which it had identified from publicly
available resources what it understands to be the name, address, owner or
developer and services provided at each retirement village in the ACT. For
some properties the information is complete, in others it is sparse, the remainder
fall in between. The respondent, EPSDD and the LTO have documents that may
shed further light on these questions. Some of that information is available to
11 Santos Ltd & Ors v Pipelines Authority of SA [1996] SASC 5628 at [53]
the respondent, not to the applicant. Additionally, the evidence sought has now
been narrowed and is well defined. If there is a degree of ‘fishing’, it amounts to
fishing in a small pond as opposed to trawling the ocean.
33. Still, there is some ‘fishing’. It is probably true that the applicant cannot know
the strength of its case unless and until it obtains the documents sought.
Additionally, some of the documents sought appear to relate mainly to assessing
the respondent’s case, or perhaps at best to putting the parties on an even
footing in terms of access to certain kinds of contextual information. Perhaps for
this reason, the applicant appears to have made a concession that some of the
documents sought may be more in the nature of discovery than the kind of
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! matter for which a subpoena would generally be used in a court or forum that
had a discovery process, interrogatories or a notice to produce.
34. Senior Counsel suggested that the absence of such procedures in the tribunal
warrants a broader approach being taken to what can be sought under a
subpoena.12 In support of this contention, he referred to the decision of
President Neate AM in FANDS (ACT) Pty Ltd v Commissioner for ACAT
Revenue [2017] ACAT 65, where it was acknowledged that:
In the absence of a process for discovery of documents (as would apply in
conventional litigation), parties before the Tribunal use subpoenas to
obtain documents that are not provided otherwise (for example as part of
the T documents).13
35. The respondent urged the Tribunal to adopt a broader test of relevance, Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
consistent with this observation, being a decision of the Associate Justice of the
ACT Supreme Court in Canberra Cleaners Pty Limited & Ors v Commissioner
for ACT Revenue [2017] ACTSC 197 at [4]:
The test for relevance of a subpoena is whether the production of
documents would be reasonably likely to add in the end to the relevant
evidence in the case, including apparent or adjectival relevance, in the
sense that the documents could ‘possibly throw light on the issues in the
main case’.
12 Transcript of proceedings 12 November 2020 pages 10-11, lines 28-33
13 FANDS (ACT) Pty Ltd v Commissioner for ACAT Revenue [2017] ACAT 65 at [45]
36. Counsel for the Commissioner, however, rejected the contention that subpoenas
should be used for purposes akin to discovery or interrogatories, submitting
that:
In relation to the test to be applied in the Tribunal, the fact that there is no
discovery … this is a factor that weighs against a broader application of
the test because subpoenas can’t be used to circumvent a limitation on the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal. If the intention of the Act, and construed in
line with its objects, in that there is not a general right to discovery,
subpoenas can’t be used to circumvent that limitation.14
37. The respondent also noted that in the more recent case of Instyle Estate Agents
Gungahlin Pty Ltd v Hambrook [2020] ACTSC 293 at [22], McWilliam AsJ
adopted the more traditional formulation of the test of relevance, although in
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
doing so her Honour noted that the test of relevance was low:
When assessing what meets the threshold for relevance, although a mere
‘fishing’ expedition is impermissible, it will be sufficient if it appears to be
‘on the cards’ that the documents will materially assist the defence:
Alister v R [1984] HCA 85; (1984) 154 CLR 404 at 414. The principle has
been stated in different ways in numerous authorities, but from the above
it can be seen that the threshold for relevance of the documents sought
under a subpoena is low.
38. Broadly, discovery is a process whereby the parties in a civil proceeding
provide each other with a list of all the documents which are or have been in
their control and which relate to any matter in question in the proceeding. It is
intended to give the parties to a proceeding access to documents that may
advance or rebut their case, to minimise surprise, and to promote settlement.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
39. Discovery is common in civil litigation in courts, but despite the tribunal’s civil
jurisdiction, neither the ACAT Act nor the ACT Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Procedures Rules 2020 (the Rules) provide for it, nor for
interrogatories or notices to produce. This is likely because the cost of
discovery is often very high, and that cost is often disproportionate the utility
of the documents discovered.15 The process, requiring affidavits, is also
burdensome. The introduction of a routine discovery process would be
14 Transcript of proceedings 12 November 2020 page 16, lines 34-40
15 Australian Government, Attorney-General’s Department Access to Justice Taskforce, A
Strategic Framework for Access to Justice in the Federal Civil Justice System (2009), Recommendation
8.2.
inconsistent with the tribunal’s stated objective that access to the tribunal is
simple and inexpensive, for all people who need to deal with the tribuna l.16
40. Even in courts, discovery is available far less frequently (if ever) in
administrative review in any jurisdiction. There are alternative procedures built
into the administrative review process in the Tribunal. Rule 130 of the Rules
requires the respondent to prepare tribunal documents containing:
…a copy of every document or part of a document in the respondent’s
possession or control that the respondent considers to be relevant to the
review of the decision by the tribunal (the tribunal documents).
[emphasis in original]
41. Where an applicant to a matter in the tribunal’s administrative review
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
jurisdiction considers the respondent to hold documents that are relevant, but
have not been disclosed, then the usual course would be to seek orders from the
tribunal for more complete tribunal documents. That was not done in this case,
likely because the applicant does not consider them relevant.
42. Notwithstanding the availability of tribunal documents, subpoenas are
nonetheless regularly issued at the request of applicants in administrative review
proceedings seeking additional documents from the respondent or another
government entity. From a practical perspective, a subpoena is often the most
efficient approach.
43. Other options are also available. The tribunal has on occasion made interim
orders under sections 23 and 56 of the ACAT Act requiring parties to produce Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
documents. Such orders are made sparingly, where it has considered it
necessary or convenient, having regard to the tribunal’s obligation to conduct
matters ensuring the procedures of the tribunal are as simple, quick,
inexpensive and informal as is consistent with achieving justice. 17 Where
made, such orders need not involve the affidavit process associated with
discovery in other jurisdictions.
44. As such, notwithstanding the absence of a formal process for discovery, there
is nothing in the ACAT Act that suggests that the Tribunal is not intended to
16 ACAT Act section 6(b)
17 ACAT Act section 7(a)
have document production powers, and indeed quite the opposite. The powers
exist but are exercised more flexibly than the procedures in other forums, as is
consistent with the objects of the ACAT Act.
45. Consistent with the observations of the President in FANDS, in considering
whether a subpoena is properly requested, and whether it is a mere ‘fishing’
exercise, it is a relevant, contextual consideration that there is no discovery
process, and that a subpoena is the only method by which the applicant can
obtain documents that it contends may be relevant, but which are in the
possession of the respondent, and which would be available to the respondent
but not itself.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
46. The key consideration in this case is whether it is at least “on the cards” that
the evidence contained in the documents could materially assist. I am satisfied
that they may shed light on what activities are ancillary to the use of land as a
retirement village. I am satisfied that documents that shed light on the
assessments of other properties may be relevant to considering whether similar
operations are being conducted as ancillary to the retirement villages, or as
separate commercial activities that benefit from co-location. The applicant has
done what research it can, using publicly available information, and has
articulated its case based on this information. The subpoena is not a mere
fishing expedition.
Oppression Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
47. The final objection to the subpoena is based on an argument of oppression. In
some cases, the volume of material sought makes compliance with the subpoena
oppressive. A subpoena may be oppressive when it requires the respondent to
extensively examine their documents and determine whether there is anything
that is relevant.18
48. This argument had weight in relation to the subpoena to the Commissioner, as
drafted. However, in the wake of the revised scope, the applicant conceded that
this ground is now largely tied to the argument that the subpoenas were a
‘fishing’ exercise. I am not satisfied that the evidence supports that any of the
18 R v Robertson (1983) 21 NTR 11
remaining searches are oppressive, although time for compliance with subpoena
(a) will need to be extended.
The Taxation Administration Act
49. In its written submissions the respondent argued that the Commissioner is not
compellable to provide the documents by reason of the operation of section 99
of the Taxation Administration Act 1999. At hearing the respondent conceded
that this argument would fall away were the Tribunal satisfied that the
subpoenas served a legitimate forensic purpose. As the Tribunal is satisfied that
the subpoenas have a legitimate forensic purpose, there is no prohibition on the
production of the documents.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
The Tribunal orders that:
(a) The Interim Application is dismissed.
(b) Immediate access to both parties to inspect, uplift, copy and photocopy
the material produced under subpoenas (b) and (c).
(c) The Return of Subpoena for subpoena (a) is adjourned to 10:00am on
Tuesday 8 December 2020.
(d) The matter is listed for further directions at 9:00am on Monday 14
December 2020.
(e) The directions 3 to 9 made on 21 August 2020 are vacated.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
………………………………..
Presidential Member H Robinson
Date(s) of hearing 12 November 2020
Counsel for the Applicant: Mr Walker SC
Solicitors for the Applicant: Minter Ellison
Counsel for the Respondent: Mr Nigel Oram
Solicitors for the Respondent: ACT Government Solicitor