AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
CITATION: MCCORMACK AND CHARLES STURT UNIVERSITY [2008]
ACTDT 4 (30 June 2008)
DT07/21
Catchwords: Discrimination because of disability in the area of education -
knowledge of effect of disability - failure to provide ergonomic
furniture - requirement to enrol by email - application to strike out
JAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! complaint as lacking in substance
Discrimination Act 1991, ss 8, 18, 77A, 79
Human Rights Commission Act 2005, s 78(2)(iv)
Legal Aid Commission (ACT) & Ors v Grundy [1999] ACTSC 318
tLI State Electricity Commission v Rabel & Ors [1997] EOC 92/875
Clean Ocean Foundation v Environment Protection Authority (2003)
20 VAR 227 at 230-231
Lucy Couper and ACT Housing [2004] ACTDT 4 (22 June 2004)
Worrall v ACT Health [2006] ACTDT 1 (18 January 2006)
Jamal v Secretary Department of Health (1988) 14 NSWSR 252
Tribunal: Mr M H Peedom, Deputy President
Date: 30 June 2008
RE: CATHLEEN
MCCORMACK
Applicant
AND: CHARLES STURT
UNIVERSITY
Respondent
ORDER
Tribunal : Mr M H Peedom, Deputy President
Date : 30 June 2008
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Order :
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS, pursuant to section 79 of the Discrimination Act 1991,
that the complaint be dismissed on the ground that it lacks substance.
…………………
Deputy President
RE: CATHLEEN
MCCORMACK
Applicant
AND: CHARLES STURT
UNIVERSITY
Respondent
REASONS FOR DECISION
30 June 2008 Mr M H Peedom, Deputy President
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
The application
The respondent in this case has applied for the complainant’s complaint of unlawful
discrimination to be struck out pursuant to section 79 of the Discrimination Act 1991
(“the Discrimination Act”). Section 79 empowers the Tribunal, at any time before it
begins hearing the complaint, to strike out the complaint on the grounds that it is
frivolous, vexatious or not made honestly or that it lacks substance. The ground relied
upon by the respondent in this case is that the complaint lacks substance.
The complaint
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
2. In her complaint, lodged with the Human Rights Commission on 14 March 2007,
the complainant alleged that she had been treated unfavourably in the area of
education because of disabilities from which she suffered. The disabilities which she
identified were “mobility problems, leg/hip, jaw joint condition”.
3. In response to requests contained in the form of complaint for information about
the treatment of which she complained and the reasons for that treatment she said that
she was asked to enrol by email at the educational institution operated by the
respondent and that this was extremely hard for her because of her disabilities. She
also alleged that she had not been provided with ergonomic furniture because the
respondent’s disability officer had requested a specialist’s medical report regarding
her disabilities and she could not afford to obtain one.
4. In support of her complaint the complainant provided to the Human Rights
Commission an email message received by her from an officer of the respondent
dated 14 February 2007, her email reply also dated 14 February 2007 and a copy of a
further email from the respondent’s officer to the complainant which does not show
its date. The first email from the respondent’s officer to the complainant referred to a
telephone conversation between the officer and the complainant and advised that it
was cheapest for the complainant to contact the respondent by email and to include
her student number in any email communication. The complainant’s response
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
explained that she had experienced difficulty getting an Internet link to activate
display of an enrolment form and asked for advice. She went on to say:
Tried twice to re-enrol BUT cannot do, due to no information through Course
information. 2nd Student Administration they made MISTAKE on two phone
calls – directed to Student Liaison Officer sick. (Student contacted on Wed
14/2/06 early afternoon. Student cannot make phone calls neither use
computer REGULAR NO access on – Thursdays. Please avoid asking to
phone Friday. Student has number of medical appointments to attend.
5. The undated email response sent on behalf of the respondent to the complainant
stated that the complainant was enrolled in Bachelor of Business (Accounting). It Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
provided an Internet address and identified the location on the webspace of the source
of information regarding re-enrolment.
6. The complainant also attached to her complaint a form of request for a health
practitioner’s report that had been signed by her and dated 5 March 2007. The form
contained advice that the respondent provided services, study and assessment,
accommodation for students with disabilities or health conditions which aimed to
reduce the impact of the conditions on study. In space provided on the form to be
completed by a health practitioner a general medical practitioner stated that the
complainant’s disabilities related to her hip, back and neck. It said that there was a
problem with the flexion of the complainant’s neck and she needed a book holder.
She was unable to write for long and needed rest breaks, a typist and a trolley to carry
books.
Procedural matters
7. The complainant’s complaint was referred by the Human Rights Commission to
the Tribunal on 17 December 2007 with a request that the matter be set down for a
public hearing. The request was accompanied by the completed complaint form to
which were attached the email communications referred to in paragraphs 4-6 above, a
copy of the decision of the Human Rights Commission in relation to the complaint,
the complainant’s request that the matter be referred to the Tribunal and letters to the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
parties notifying them that the matter had been referred to the Tribunal.
8. In her decision, dated 11 October 2007 the delegate of the Human Rights
Commission closed the complaint, pursuant to Section 78 (2)(iv) of the Human Rights
Commission Act 2005, being satisfied that the complaint lacked substance.
9. On 18 December 2007 a directions hearing was listed before the Tribunal for 14
January 2008. On 11 January 2008 the respondent lodged an application pursuant to
section 79 of the Discrimination Act that the complaint be struck out on the ground
that it was lacking in substance. On 14 January 2007 the complainant requested an
adjournment of the directions hearing listed for that day by telephone to the Registry
of the Tribunal on the ground that she had only received notice of the directions Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
hearing on that date on return to her home from interstate and that she wished to
arrange for assistance to be provided to her by a disability advocate. The directions
hearing was adjourned to 21 January 2008.
10. At the directions hearing on 21 January 2008 the consent of the Tribunal was
given to the respondent being represented by a legal practitioner. The complainant
represented herself but was assisted by an advocate from Advocacy for Inclusion, an
organisation which, inter alia, provides assistance to and represents persons who have
a disability. The Tribunal indicated to the parties that it was not prepared to consider
the strike out application prior to the complainant having opportunity to present to the
Tribunal the evidence on which she relied in support of her complaint. It directed that
the complainant file and serve a response to the respondent’s strike out application by
22 February 2008.
11. On 22 February 2008 the complainant contacted the Registry of the Tribunal by
telephone and requested that it extend the time for compliance with the directions
given on 21 January 2008. She said that she had not been aware that the Human
Rights Commission had not forwarded all of the documents relevant to her complaint
to the Tribunal and she needed time for her advocate to assist her in preparing the
documents. She was requested to make a written application for an extension of time
explaining the reasons for her failure to comply with the direction and to provide a
copy to the respondent.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
12. By letter dated 28 February 2008 the complainant’s advocate requested the
Tribunal to provide advice as to what was required to be done by the complainant to
comply with the Tribunal’s direction.
13. The advocate was given telephone advice by the Tribunal Registry on 4 March
2008 that a request for an extension of time to comply with the Tribunal’s directions
explaining why it had not been possible to comply with the directions should be
provided to the Tribunal and a copy given to the respondent. She was given further
explanation regarding the Tribunal’s procedures for dealing with such applications.
14. By email dated 4 March 2008 the advocate advised the Tribunal that the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
complainant had left a message for her to say that she had left to go to Wagga Wagga
and did not explain clearly when she would return.
15. By letter dated 6 March 2008 the Tribunal Registry advised the advocate (and the
parties) that the matter had been listed for a further directions hearing on 17 March
2008 and that the complainant should respond to the strike out application prior to that
date and file and serve a copy of any witness statement and evidence on which she
intended to rely prior to that date. If she was unable to do so she should provide a
written explanation to the Tribunal and the respondent. The complainant did not
lodge any of the material as requested by it but she contacted the Tribunal by
telephone and said that she could not attend the Tribunal on 17 March 2008, as her
advocate did not work on that day.
16. At a directions hearing on 17 March 2008, at which the complainant did not
appear, the Tribunal directed her to lodge with the Tribunal and serve on the
respondent any witness statement and any other material intended to be relied upon by
her by 14 April 2008. The respondent was directed to serve any material in reply by
28 April 2008 and the matter was listed for hearing on 13 May 2008.
17. The complainant’s advocate contacted the Tribunal Registry by telephone on 19
March 2008 and advised that she had arranged a meeting with the complainant on 26
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
March 2008 and hoped to then progress the matter. She further advised that a meeting
was, in fact, held on 3 April 2008 and a further meeting arranged for 10 April 2008.
18. The complainant lodged with the Tribunal a document signed by her and dated 10
April 2008. The content of that letter is referred to below. No other material was
filed or served on behalf of the complainant in compliance with the Tribunal’s
directions dated 17 March 2008 or otherwise.
19. On 23 April 2008 the Tribunal received a letter from the respondent’s solicitors,
which asserted that the complainant’s letter dated 10 April 2008 did not satisfy the
Tribunal’s directions and that it raised new complaints not contained in the complaint
to the Human Rights Commission. The letter requested that the Tribunal exercise its Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
power under section 77A of the Discrimination Act to strike out the complaint.
Section 77A empowers the Tribunal to refuse to hear, or further hear, a complaint if
the complainant fails to comply with a reasonable direction of the Tribunal.
20. Following confirmation by the respondent’s solicitors that they had served a copy
of their letter to the Tribunal dated 23 April 2008 on the complainant on 30 April
2008 the Tribunal advised the parties that it proposed to hear the respondent’s
applications made pursuant to section 77A and section 79 of the Discrimination Act
on 13 May 2008.
21. By letter dated 7 May 2008 the respondent’s solicitors advised that the application
made pursuant to section 77A was withdrawn.
The Hearing
22. At the hearing of the application by the respondent to strike out the complaint
pursuant to section 79 of the Discrimination Act the complainant represented herself
but was assisted by Mr I Goodacre, an advocate from Advocacy for Inclusion. The
respondent was represented, with the consent of the Tribunal, by Ms W Li, a legal
practitioner.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
23. The Tribunal admitted in evidence on behalf of the complainant the documents
referred to in paragraph 7 above and the document dated 10 April 2008 (referred to in
paragraph 18 above). In that document the complainant stated that she had provided a
series of medical certificates to the respondent in 2007. She understood that the
respondent had the necessary ergonomic furniture recommended by the certificates
but the respondent had refused to provide it to her. She said that anti-glare screens for
computers (which, presumably she had requested) did exist and they were on the
computers at the university. She suggested that a further search could be made for the
screens.
24. On behalf of the Respondent, email correspondence between the complainant and
an officer of the Respondent dated 9 November 2007 and a statement of Miriam Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Dayhew dated 24 April 2008 were admitted in evidence.
25. The email message from the complainant to an officer of the Respondent dated 9
November 2007 thanked the officer for giving the complainant a reminder about her
re-enrolment at the university and said that she would like to enrol in ACC100
Accounting 1 Information and Business MKT110 Marketing Principal for 2008. In
her reply, also dated 9 November 2007, the officer stated that she had completed the
complainant’s enrolment and that she was taking annual leave.
26. Miriam Dayhew occupies the position of University Ombudsman employed by the
respondent. In a written statement admitted in evidence Ms Dayhew said that the
complainant first registered with the university’s disability service on 2 March 2005
with supporting medical documentation indicating that she had “right elbow, forearm,
wrist and hand, occupational overuse syndrome/repetitive strain injury”. In
accordance with usual practise, on registering with the disability services, the
respondent developed a support plan to accommodate the complainant’s disabilities.
This was done in consultation with the complainant and the co-ordinators for the
courses in which the complainant was enrolled. The support plan was developed in
2005 and subsequently monitored by the Respondent and amended as considered
appropriate. Copies of the support plans were attached to Ms Dayhew’s statement.
27. Steps taken by the Respondent to accommodate the complainants disabilities
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
included, without charge, the provision of a mobility scooter for use when visiting the
university campus, a track-ball ergonomic mouse, a light weight aluminium trolley for
carrying heavy books, a copy of voice recognition software and accessories for
software for use in her home study environment and an ergonomically suitable work
station. The respondent also allowed the complainant extra time for the completion of
assignments, special provision for exams and early distance education study packages
and being provided with individual training sessions in the use of the voice
recognition software.
28. Ms Dayhew stated that when the complainant registered with the disability service
she did not advise that she could not use the internet or type nor did she subsequently
provide such advice to the respondent. The respondent first became aware that the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
complainant said she had a typing difficulty was when it received a copy of the
complaint made to the Human Rights Commission. She said that she was aware that
the complainant had used the Internet and email frequently in the past to study and
communicate with the university. She attached to her statement a number of emails
received by the respondent from the complainant.
29. Ms Dayhew had subsequently become aware that the complainant did not enrol
online but had been personally enrolled by the respondent’s staff after they had been
informed that the complainant had difficulty enrolling online.
30. Ms Dayhew said that, to verify the nature of a student’s disability and to
determine what assistance was necessary to be provided, the respondent required
supporting documentation from an appropriate health professional. In order to revise
and update the complainant’s disability support plan for 2007 the respondent
requested an update of the complainant’s medical information. When contacted by the
respondent’s disability liaison officer on 28 February 2007 the complainant indicated
that she had no objection to the provision of such information. The disability liaison
officer did not request a specialist report, but asked for an updated report from the
complainant’s treating medical practitioner. No disability service was withheld
pending receipt of that information.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
31. Ms Dayhew said that the respondent received a number of medical certificates
from the complainant in 2007. A certificate from Dr. Dutta dated 15 March 2007
stated that the complainant had “neck, shoulder, hip & thigh pain aggravated by use of
the library chair and table setting”. The certificate stated that the complainant would
benefit from an ergonomic chair (preferably gas lift) in the library. This was
apparently a reference to the National Library of Australia, where the complainant
undertook study/research.
32. A report by an unidentified health practitioner dated 5 March 2007 stated that the
complainant suffered:
hip pain, back pain, neck pain for 12/12. Unable to look down…shock Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
reaction 3 months ago…unable to read with flexion of neck. Need book holder.
Unable to write for long. Need break and typist. Need aluminium trolley to
carry textbooks.
The respondent had supplied these adjustments and provided information to the
complainant on how to create a book holder.
33. A medical certificate from Dr S Lo dated 5 March 2007 stated:
Suffers from soft tissue injuries and chronic pain on her neck back and hip.
She requires aluminium trolley, book holder, <adjustable>, regular breaks,
gas lift ergonomic chair, trackball device, antiglare screen blue glass, electric
scooter. She also requests a typist for assistance.
34. In relation to Dr Lo’s report, Ms Dayhew said that when attending the university
campus, the complainant was provided with regular breaks, an ergonomically suitable
workstation, track-ball device and an electric scooter. The use of either a typist or
voice recognition software to assist with typing tasks was also provided to the
complainant. The respondent had made no provision for the provision of an
ergonomic chair at the National Library of Australia. She said that the respondent’s
computer monitors were not fitted with antiglare screens as the computers were
antiglare and did not require them.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
35. In oral evidence given at the hearing Ms Dayhew said that the complainant was
contacted by the respondent’s disability liaison officer to enquire whether she wished
to re-enrol at the university in 2007. When she indicated that she did she was directed
to the university’s website with instructions as to the manner in which the re-
enrolment should be made. She was advised what information needed to be provided
but when she said that she was unable to complete the enrolment form this was done
on her behalf by university staff.
36. There was produced in evidence an email from the complainant to an officer of
the respondent, which thanked her for reminding the complainant about her re-
enrolment. She identified the subjects in which she was to be enrolled and provided Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
her student identification number. An email reply, also dated 9 November 2007,
confirmed that the complainant had been enrolled as requested.
37. In cross-examination by the complainant it was put to Ms Dayhew that the
complainant had requested the provision of an ergonomic chair about three weeks
prior to attending a lecture on one of her subjects. Ms Dayhew agreed that the
respondent had received a request by the complainant for the provision to her of an
ergonomic chair at a voluntary seminar conducted by Macquarie University in
Sydney. The respondent’s disability liaison officer had contacted Macquarie
University and requested that a gas filled chair be provided to the complainant as well
as a heat pack and access to a microwave oven and acceptance of the need for the
complainant to move around from time to time which could be a cause of disturbance
to other students at the seminar. Macquarie University has advised a few days in
advance of the seminar that it would be unable to provide a gas filled chair at the
venue at which the seminar was to be conducted but could arrange for the
complainant to be located in a position where she could move from her seat from time
to time. The disability liaison officer contacted the complainant and advised her that
an ergonomic chair could not be provided so that she could make the decision as to
whether she wish to continue with her attendance at the seminar or not.
38. The complainant suggested to Ms Dayhew that the respondent had failed to
provide the equipment referred to in the request for health practitioner’s report dated 5
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
March 2007. In particular it was suggested that the complainant had not been
provided with a monitor raiser or an adjustable book holder. Ms Dayhew disagreed
that the health practitioner’s report did, in fact, contain a request for the provision for
either such item. She said that on the occasions when the complainant visited the
university campus arrangements had been made by the disability liaison officer to
provide a workstation specifically designed to meet her needs. This had included the
positioning of a computer screen at the correct height, a chair that could be adjusted to
suit her posture and a book holder that was positioned so as to avoid the need for her
to look down at reading material. This had specifically addressed the inability of the
complainant to read with flexion of her neck. The disability liaison officer who
assisted the complainant was a qualified occupational therapist and had attended the
complainant on each occasion on which she had attended the university campus to Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
assist in addressing the requirements identified in the medical certificates provided by
the complainant to the respondent.
39. In response suggestions by the Tribunal that the complainant might wish by her
questions to identify specific items or requirements that she alleged had been
identified by medical certificates as required for use by her and not provided to her,
the complainant stated that they appeared in documents that she would need to
forward to the university.
The law to be applied
40. Having regard to the nature of the allegations made by the complainant
consideration is required to be given as to whether the respondent acted contrary to
Section 18 of the Discrimination Act. That section provides:
18 Education
(1) It is unlawful for an educational authority to discriminate against a
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! person-
(a) by failing to accept the person’s application for admission as a
student; or
(b) in the terms or conditions on which it is prepared to admit the
person as a student.
Note The Legislation Act, dict, pt 1 defines fail to include refuse.
(2) It is unlawful for an educational authority to discriminate against a
student-
(a) by denying the student access, or limiting the student’s access, to
any benefit provided by the authority; or
(b) by expelling the student; or
(c) by subjecting the student to any other detriment.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Under Section 8 of the Discrimination Act discrimination occurs if-
(a) the person treats or proposes to treat the other person unfavourably
because the other person has, inter alia, a disability; or
(b) the person imposes or proposes to impose a condition or requirement
(other than a condition or requirement which is reasonable in the
circumstances) that has, or is likely to have, the affect of disadvantaging
people because of the disability.
Section 79 of the Discrimination Act, pursuant to which the respondents strike out
application was made, provides:
Application to strike out complaint
The person against whom a complaint is made may, at any time after the
complaint is referred to the tribunal and before the tribunal begins hearing the
complaint (other than a time when the complaint is being conciliated under
the HRC Act), apply to the tribunal to strike out the complaint on any of the
following grounds:
(a) the complaint is frivolous, vexatious or not made honestly;
(b) the complaint lacks substance.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi
Reason for decision
41. In order for the complaint to be substantiated there would need to be some
evidence favourable to the complainant’s contentions which, taken at their highest in
favour of those contentions, would render them seriously arguable (see Legal Aid
Commissioner (ACT) & Ors v Grundy [1999] ACTSC 318). In determining whether a
complaint should be struck out pursuant to section 79 of the Discrimination Act, the
Tribunal ordinarily accepts that it should be assumed that the factual allegations relied
on by the complainant are true and such inferences in favour of the respondent as are
open should be drawn (see Grundy’s Case, paras 4 and 5). If, however, it is clear
beyond doubt that the complainant has no arguable case, which should be allowed to
be resolved at a full hearing, a complaint may be dismissed as lacking in substance
pursuant to section 79 of the Act (see State Electricity Commission v Rabel & Ors
[1997] EOC 92/875). The power to dismiss a claim as without substance is required to Must !! AustLll AustLI AustLi
be exercised with considerable caution (see Clean Ocean Foundation v Environment
Protection Authority (2003) 20 VAR 227 at 230-231. See also Lucy Couper and ACT
Housing, [2004] ACTDT 4 (22 June 2004).
42. In this case it was not disputed that at the relevant times the respondent was an
educational authority and that the complainant suffered from a disability. The
respondent did, however, submit that the complainant had failed to substantiate her
allegations that she had been treated unfavourably because of her disability, or at all,
or that the respondent had imposed any condition or requirement that had, or was
likely to have, the affect of disadvantaging the complainant because of her disability.
43. In Rabel’s Case, referred to above, in holding that the Victorian Equal
Opportunity Board, where exercising the power under section 44C of the Equal
Opportunity Act, which is in substantially the same terms as section 79 of the
Discrimination Act, was entitled, though not obliged, to determine the matter without
receiving evidence, Tadgell JA observed:
The board…did conclude that the complaint was “lacking in substance”
because, as I understand, there was an insufficiently solid factual foundation
for it. That, of course, is a justification for dismissing a complaint after
hearing the complainant’s evidence. It is not, in my opinion, a justification for
ordering that a complaint be “struck out” pursuant to Section 44C at all
events without allowing evidence to be called by the complainant with a view
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
to establishing a prima facie case.
44. At page 119 of Rabel’s Case, however, Phillips JA adverted to the possibility that
a strike out application could be determined in circumstances where the complainant
did concede, at some preliminary and interlocutory stage, that the whole of his
material was before the Equal Opportunity Board and that material plainly
demonstrated that the complaint was lacking in substance.
45. The application to strike out the complaint, when initially made by the respondent,
preceded the giving of the directions by the Tribunal on 21 January 2008 and 17
March 2008 and any opportunity for the complainant to present the evidence on
which she relied in support of her complaint. Nor had she by then made any Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
concession that she had provided to the Tribunal all of the material that she might
wish to rely upon in support of her complaint. The strike out application was then
plainly premature (see also Worrall v ACT Health [2006] ACTDT 1 (18 January
2006).
46. Opportunity was, however, given by the Tribunal’s directions for the complainant
to present to it and the respondent the evidence on which she did rely. Although, as is
noted below, the complainant indicated at the hearing that there was other material
that she considered may support her case, in the view of the Tribunal, reasonable
opportunity had been given to her by the Tribunal’s directions to lodge the evidence
on which she wished to rely before the hearing and, in the absence of any explanation
as to why the directions had not been complied with or as to the detail of such
evidence, there was no justification for delaying resolution of the strike out
application by adjourning the hearing to allow further evidence to be tendered by the
complainant.
47. In relation to the complainant’s complaint regarding her re-enrolment at the
university in 2007, although some of the email communications between the
complainant and the respondent suggest that the respondent’s staff expressed a
preference for communication with the respondent by the complainant to be by email,
the emails from the complainant do not suggest that any difficulty which she
encountered with that form of communication was attributable to her disabilities. On
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
the contrary, there was a significant use of email communication by the complainant
without any suggestion that this form of communication was made difficult by her
disabilities. To the extent to which the complainant experienced difficulty re-enrolling
online her emails suggest that this was attributable to difficulty which she experienced
in understanding the directions given by the online enrolment facility.
48. In order to constitute discrimination the conduct complained of must be advertent
and done with knowledge of the disability. It is not possible to discriminate against a
person with a disability contrary to section 18 of the Discrimination Act unless the
person against whom the complaint is made knows the existence of the fact (see Jamal -
v Secretary Department of Health (1988) 14 NSWSR 252).
Must !!! Aust!Il AustLI AustLi
49. In the absence of evidence of knowledge of the respondent that the complainant
experienced difficulty in using email communication because of her disability and
having regard to the evidence before the Tribunal of a history of use by the
complainant of email communication, a finding that the respondent acted unlawfully
is not open to the Tribunal. I note that in any event, the complainant was not required
to complete her enrolment online as this was done by staff of the respondent on her
behalf following a request made by her by telephone. This aspect of her complaint
should be struck out.
50. In relation to the complainant’s allegation that the respondent refused or failed to
provide her with ergonomic furniture because she had not provided to it a report from
a specialist medical practitioner, no documentary evidence of any such request by the
respondent or other requirement imposed by it for such a report was provided to the
Tribunal. Nor did the complainant present any evidence of such a request being made
to her or of any such requirement being imposed on her. I see no reason to not accept
the evidence of Ms Dayhew that no such request was made or that any such
requirement was imposed. This aspect of her complaint, as formulated by it, cannot be
substantiated.
51. At the hearing of the complaint, however, the respondent did not seek to restrict
the complainant’s complaint regarding the inadequacy of ergonomic furniture or the
failure to provide it as requested by the complainant to the terms of her complaint to
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
the Human Rights Commission. It relied upon additional grounds.
52. I accept the submission made on behalf of the respondent that the fact that
ergonomic furniture was not provided to the complainant when she attended a seminar
in New South Wales, is a matter that is beyond the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
53. In relation to the complainant’s attendance of the respondent’s university campus,
Ms Dayhew gave evidence that the complainant’s requirements for ergonomic
furniture on these occasions when she attended the university campus were
individually assessed and arranged to be provided by a qualified occupational
therapist and were designed to meet her personal requirements. Aside from any
question of lack of jurisdiction in relation to this aspect of her complaint, the absence Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
of any evidence to support a finding that ergonomic furniture provided to her was
deficient her complaint cannot be substantiated.
54. Whether the failure of the respondent to provide ergonomic furniture at a location
in the Australian Capital Territory involved unfavourable treatment of the
complainant or involved the imposition of a condition or requirement that was
unreasonable would depend upon a consideration of a range of factors including the
nature and extent of the student’s disability, the particular equipment required, the
capacity of the venue to accommodate it, the frequency with which the equipment
would be used, the availability and practicality of the use of alternative venues for
study and any necessary research, the cost of providing the equipment and other
factors.
55. The absence of evidence to enable these kinds of matters to be assessed precludes
any finding by the Tribunal that the complainant has been able to substantiate a
complaint that she has been treated unfavourably or that an unreasonable condition or
requirement had been imposed upon her.
Conclusion
56. I therefore conclude that the complainant’s complaints lack substance and should
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
be struck out.
istLI AustLII AustLI
PUBLICATION DETAILS
TO BE PUBLISHED
To be completed by Member's Staff
________________________________________________________________________
PART A FILE NO: DT07/21
COMPLAINANT: CATHLEEN MCCORMACK
RESPONDENT: CHARLES STURT UNIVERSITY
PARTY JOINED: N/A
COUNSEL APPEARING: COMPLAINANT:
RESPONDENT: MS W LI
PARTY JOINED:
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
SOLICITORS: COMPLAINANT:
RESPONDENT: MINTER ELLISON
PARTY JOINED:
OTHER: COMPLAINANT:
RESPONDENT:
PARTY JOINED:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER/S: MR M H PEEDOM, DEPUTY PRESIDENT
DATE/S OF HEARING: 13 MAY 2008 PLACE: CANBERRA
DATE OF DECISION: 30 JUNE 2008 PLACE: CANBERRA
_______________________________________________________________________