IN THE TENANCY TRIBUNAL )
OF THE )
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY ) No: TT 102 of 1997
In the matter of:
CANBERRA AERO
CLUB
(applicant)
And:
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! FEDERAL AIRPORTS
CORPORATION
(respondent)
DECISION OF PRESIDENT BURNS RELATING TO THE QUESTION OF THE
JURISDICTION OF THE TRIBUNAL TO DEAL WITH THE MATTER,
DELIVERED ON 11 JUNE 1998
The applicants, Canberra Aero Club, by a Notice of Dispute dated 2 February 1997 notified the
Registrar of the Tenancy Tribunal of a dispute with the respondent, the Federal Airports
Corporation. The applicant was the tenant of the respondent. The premises the subject of the
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
dispute are Site 283, Canberra Airport. The particulars of the dispute as outlined by the applicant
are as follows:
“[The applicant] entered into a written lease commencing 16 June 1966 with the
respondent. On or about 22 December 1986 the tenancy became a monthly
tenancy incorporating terms including that the [respondent] would give the [applicant]
adequate time after termination of the lease to remove [the applicant’s] building,
fixtures and fittings.
[The respondent] terminated the monthly tenancy by notice expiring on 31 July 1996.
tl AustLll AustLll AustLll
[The applicant] entered discussions/negotiations with [the respondent] on a number
of matters, including being reimbursed for the market value of the applicant’s on site
improvements.............
The [respondent] made representations on which the [applicant] relied, that it would
provide compensation for its improvements.”
The applicant alleges that the respondent resiled from its representations in failing to allow the
applicant adequate time to remove its building, fixtures and fittings and in failing to provide
compensation for the improvements which the applicant had made to the premises. As a result, the
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
applicant claims it lost opportunity and business income. The applicant alleges that the conduct of the
respondent in that regard was harsh and oppressive. The applicant submits that the Tribunal has
jurisdiction to deal with this dispute pursuant to paragraphs 6(1)(b) and 6(1)(g) of the Tenancy
Tribunal Act 1994 (ACT).
The respondent submits that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to hear the dispute, as a result, inter alia,
of sections 27 and 28 of the Australian Capital Territory (Self Government) Act 1988 (“the Self
Government Act”). The respondent has other grounds upon which it denies that the Tribunal has
jurisdiction to hear this dispute but they require the Tribunal to receive evidence in order to
determine them. The parties accepted that the present objections to jurisdiction could conveniently
be dealt with separately to the remainder of the grounds, which could await further hearing if Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
necessary.
JURISDICTION
The parties were notified by the Registrar of the Tenancy Tribunal by a letter dated 24 March 1997
that submissions as to the ability of the Tribunal to deal with the matter under section 13 of the
Tenancy Tribunal Act 1994 would be required. Written submissions were filed by the respondent
on 24 April 1997 and by the applicant on 16 May 1997. Due to the complexity of the issues
relating to jurisdiction the Registrar decided, pursuant to section 15(1) of the Tenancy Tribunal Act
1994 to refer the matter to the Tribunal to determine the issue of jurisdiction. The parties were
notified of this decision by letter dated 19 May 1997.
Notices under section 78B of the Judiciary Act 1903 were served on the Commonwealth, State
and Territory Attorneys-General. Surprisingly, the Australian Capital Territory Attorney-General
declined to make any submissions on the ambit or effect of section 27 of the Self Government Act.
Further written submissions were filed by the applicant and respondent with respect to sections 27
and 28 of the Self Government Act. Those submissions were orally addressed on 22 December
1997. The Commonwealth and ACT Attorneys-General declined to make any submissions to the
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Tribunal on the interpretation of s 27.
A first draft of this decision was completed by early February 1998. However, in completing that
draft the issue arose as to whether the relationship between s 64 of the Judiciary Act 1903 and s
27 of the Self Government Act could illuminate the meaning of the latter provision, albeit that s 64
of the Judiciary Act 1903 has no direct application to the present proceedings. The Tribunal
therefore directed the Registrar of the Tribunal to write to the ACT Attorney General to again
request submissions from the Territory on the interpretation of s 27 of the Self Government Act.
The forwarding of this letter was delayed by the ACT elections until 31 March 1998. The ACT
Government Solicitor provided written submissions on 21 May 1998 which merely pointed out that
s 64 of the Judiciary Act 1903 did not apply to this dispute, and unfortunately did not address the Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
interpretation of s 27 of the Self Government Act.
The Tribunal is thus called upon to consider a provision of the Self Government Act of potentially
considerable significance to the Territory and its citizens with no guidance or assistance from the
Government of the Territory.
The respondent submits that this Tribunal has no jurisdiction to deal with this dispute, and relies in
that regard upon the provisions of sections 27 and 28 of the Australian Capital Territory (Self
Government) Act 1988 (“the Self Government Act”). These sections provide:
“s 27 Except as provided by the regulations, an enactment does not bind the
Crown in right of the Commonwealth.”
“s 28 (1) A provision of an enactment has no effect to the extent that it is
inconsistent with a law defined by subsection (2), but such a provision shall be taken
to be consistent with such a law to the extent that it is capable of operating
concurrently with that law.
(2) In this section:
“law” means:
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
(a) a law in force in the Territory (other than an enactment or a
subordinate law); or
(b) an award, order or determination, or any other instrument of a
legislative character, made under a law falling within paragraph
(a).”
“Enactment” is defined in section 3 of the Self Government Act as, inter alia, “ a law (however
described or entitled) made by the Assembly under this Act.”
It is common ground that the Tenancy Tribunal Act 1994 is an “enactment” as defined in section 3
of the Self Government Act. It is also common ground that the Tenancy Tribunal Act 1994 has Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
not been prescribed by regulation as an enactment that binds the Crown in the right of the
Commonwealth.
The respondent contends that it enjoys the privileges and immunities of the Crown in the right of the
Commonwealth, and as such the provisions of the Tenancy Tribunal Act 1994 do not apply to give
this Tribunal jurisdiction to hear a dispute to which it is a party.
DOES THE FEDERAL AIRPORTS CORPORATION ENJOY THE PRIVILEGES AND
IMMUNITIES OF THE CROWN IN THE RIGHT OF THE COMMONWEALTH?
This question has already been judicially determined. In Ventana Pty Ltd v Federal Airports
Corporation & Ors (1997) 147 ALR 200 Ryan J sitting as the Federal Court determined that the
Federal Airports Corporation was entitled to the immunities of the Crown in the right of the
Commonwealth.
Whilst it may be argued that this Tribunal is not strictly bound by the rules of precedent that govern
the operation of the Courts, as a question of policy relevant decisions of Superior Courts should be
treated as determining the relevant issue.
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
This is particularly so in the instant case, as an appeal lies from this Tribunal to the ACT Supreme
Court, which would be bound by the Federal Court decision in Ventana.
For this reason the Tribunal accepts that the Federal Airports Corporation enjoys the privileges and
immunities of the Crown in the right of the Commonwealth.
SUBMISSIONS WITH RESPECT TO S 27 SELF GOVERNMENT ACT
The respondent submitted that the effect of s 27 of the Self Government Act was to deny to this
Tribunal the jurisdiction to hear this dispute. Were it not for the existence of s 27 of the Self AtustLI AustLll AustLII AustLi
Government Act the legal issue of the jurisdiction of this Tribunal would have been elucidated by
the decision of the High Court in Re Residential Tenancies Tribunal of New South Wales & Ors; Ex
Parte Defence Housing Authority (1997) 146 ALR 495 (“the Defence Housing Case”). It is
convenient to examine the principles examined in that case.
In the Defence Housing Case the High Court considered whether the New South Wales
Residential Tenancies Act 1987 applied to premises leased to the Defence Housing Authority.
The majority of the High Court (Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ), relying upon
Commonwealth v Cigamatic Pty Ltd (In Liq.) (1962) 108 CLR 372, drew a distinction between the
“ capacities and functions of the Crown in the right of the Commonwealth and the transactions in
which that Crown may choose to engage in exercise of its capacities and functions.” (per Brennan
CJ at p 497). The Chief Justice further stated:
“By ‘capacities and functions’ I mean the rights, powers, privileges and immunities
which are collectively described as the ‘executive power of the Commonwealth’ in s
61 of the Constitution.” (at p 497).
Section 61 of the Constitution provides:
“The executive power of the Commonwealth is vested in the Queen and is
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
exercisable by the Governor-General as the Queen’s representative, and extends to
the execution and maintenance of this Constitution, and of the laws of the
Commonwealth.”
The position of the States with respect to the ability to bind the Crown in the right of the
Commonwealth in the exercise of its capacities or functions is clear. In a joint judgment Justices
Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron said:
“In Cigamatic it was held that a State legislature had no power to impair the
capacities of the Commonwealth Executive, but at the same time it was recognised
that the Commonwealth may be regulated by State laws of general application in Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
those activities it carried on in common with other citizens.” (at pages 508-509)
The respondent submits that when s 27 of the Self Government Act provides that an ACT
enactment does not “bind the Crown” it is intended that such an enactment will not bind the Crown
whether in the exercise of its functions or capacities, or in the transactions in which the Crown
chooses to engage in the exercise of those functions or capacities. The applicant submits that s 27
of the Self Government Act is only intended to preclude ACT enactments “binding the Crown” in
the former of those two senses, so that the Commonwealth Crown would be subject to Territory
enactments of general application when engaging in ordinary transactions.
The language of some earlier cases was such as to suggest that an enactment only sought to “bind”
the Crown if it sought to modify what Brennan CJ referred to as the functions and capacities of the
Crown. Enactments that affected the Crown in the wider sense of regulating the transactions in
which the Crown chose to engage in the exercise of its functions and capacities were referred to as
“affecting” the Crown: see Commonwealth v Bogle (1959) 84 CLR 229. It is difficult to see any
real distinction in those concepts. As Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ said in the Defence
Housing case:
“But it is impossible to say what is meant by “affected by State laws” if it does not
mean that the Crown in the right of the Commonwealth is bound by them.” (at p.515)
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi
Thus whilst a State has no power to bind the Crown in the right of the Commonwealth in the
exercise of its capacities and functions, the Commonwealth Crown may be bound by State laws of
general application regulating transactions into which the Commonwealth Crown may choose to
enter.
For the applicant’s submission on s 27 to be correct, it follows that there must be some
circumstance in which it was envisaged by the Commonwealth Parliament that the enactment of the
Australian Capital Territory could bind the Crown in the right of the Commonwealth in the exercise
of its capacities and functions. Otherwise the provision is otiose, which should not lightly be
inferred of a provision of an Act of Parliament.
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Little assistance in the interpretation of s 27 of the Self Government Act can be gleaned from the
Explanatory Memorandum of the Self Government Act. In common with virtually all Explanatory
Memoranda of Commonwealth Acts since the passing of the provisions of s 15 AB of the Acts
Interpretation Act 1901 the Explanatory Memorandum of the Self Government Act merely
paraphrases section 27 of the Act.
I have also referred to the Second Reading speech of the then Minister for the Arts and Territories
in the House of Representatives on 19 October 1988. Slightly more assistance is available from
this document. The Minister frequently emphasises the fact that the Territory is the national capital
and the seat of government. With respect to Part III of the Self Government Act the Minister
said:
“The Assembly will have the power to make laws for the peace, order and good
government of the Territory. Most ordinance law in place in the Territory will become
Assembly law on the commencing day. The Governor General will, as occurs in the
Northern Territory, have the power to disallow any Assembly law within six months
of the law being made. Commonwealth law will prevail over Assembly law.
Protections such as these are essential in the national capital.”
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
The reference to Commonwealth law prevailing over Assembly law is very likely a reference to the
provisions of s 28 of the Self Government Act rather than to s 27, but the Minister’s statements
reflect an attitude that the position of the Territory as the national capital was a significant
consideration for the Parliament. This lends some slight support to the respondent’s submission in
that it may explain why the Parliament in enacting s 27 (if one accepts the respondent’s submissions
as to the interpretation of this section) was placing the Territory in a different position to the States
and the Northern Territory (there being no equivalent to s 27 of the Self Government Act to be
found in the Northern Territory (Self Government) Act 1978).
It is axiomatic that no other body politic within the Commonwealth may modify the executive
power of the Commonwealth: see Re Residential Tenancies Tribunal of New South Wales & Ors; Must!Il Aust!Il AustLI AustLi
Ex Parte Defence Housing Authority (1997) 146 ALR 495 at pp 497-498 per Brennan CJ. As
their Honours Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ said in that case:
“The States ... do not have specific legislative powers which might be construed as
authorising them to restrict or modify the executive capacities of the Commonwealth.
The legislative power of the States is an undefined residue which, containing no such
authorisation, cannot be construed as extending to the executive capacities of the
Commonwealth. No implication limiting or otherwise giving power is needed; the
character of the Commonwealth as a body politic, armed with executive capacities by
the Constitution by its very nature places those capacities outside the legislative power
of another body politic, namely a State, without specific powers in that respect.” (at
page 509)
As noted above the position with respect to State legislation binding the Crown in the right of the
Commonwealth in the exercise of its capacities and functions is clear. If the Territory is to have
such a power, which is not enjoyed by the States, it must arise from the fact that the Territory is a
territory, and not a State. Logically, the only manner in which it could be suggested that the
Territory as a territory could differ from the States in its ability to pass laws binding the Crown in the
right of the Commonwealth in the exercise of its capacities and functions, is if the Territory is
exercising the same legislative power as the Commonwealth. In other words, the Territory must be
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
exercising delegated Commonwealth legislative power.
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
THE NATURE OF SELF GOVERNMENT IN THE ACT
The question of the nature of the ACT’s legislative power has also been considered by the High
Court. In Capital Duplicators Pty Ltd v Australian Capital Territory (1992) 177 CLR 248 the
majority (Brennan, Dean and Toohey JJ with whom Gaudron J agreed) with reference to s 22 of the
Self Government Act stated:
“(ACT) Enactments are made under a power to make laws “for the peace, order
and good government” of the Australian Capital Territory. Such a power has been
recognised as a plenary power...The terms in which s 22 confers power on the
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust
Legislative Assembly show - to adopt the language of Powell v Apollo Candle Co.
(1885) 10 App. Cases at p 289 - that the Parliament did not intend the Legislative
Assembly to exercise its powers “in any sense (as) agent or delegate of the ...
Parliament, but... intended (the Legislative Assembly) to have plenary powers of
legislation as large, and of the same nature, as those of Parliament itself.” (at page
281)
Their Honours continue:
“The Legislative Assembly of the Australian Capital Territory has been erected to
exercise not the Parliament’s powers, but its own, being powers of the same nature Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
as those vested in the Parliament.” (at page 282)
At page 283 their Honours conclude:
“The question is not whether the Parliament has abdicated its legislative powers: it
cannot abdicate and it has not abdicated its powers under s 122 of the Constitution.
Nor is the problem whether Parliament could delegate its legislative powers: it can,
but it has not done so. The question is whether Parliament has purported to create a
legislature with its own legislative powers concurrent with, and of the same nature as,
the powers of the Parliament: that is what the Parliament has done, and what it has
done is of a radically different constitutional character form either abdication or
delegation.”
The legislative power of the ACT Legislative Assembly is not a delegated Commonwealth power.
The Commonwealth Parliament has created a new body politic (see s 5 of the Self Government
Act) with legislative powers concurrent with, and of the same nature as, the powers of the
Parliament. It must follow that the Legislative Assembly of the ACT, similar to State legislatures,
has no power to bind the Crown in the right of the Commonwealth in the exercise of its functions
and capacities by enactment.
Aus"I, II AustLII AustLII Aust!
SECTION 64 JUDICIARY ACT 1903
tLI The applicant submitted that in the event that the respondent was found to be entitled to the privilege
and immunities of the Crown in the right of the Commonwealth, section 64 of the Judiciary Act
1903 (Commonwealth) operates to make the respondent subject to the provisions of the Tenancy
Tribunal Act 1994.
Section 64 provides:
“In any suit in which the Commonwealth or a State is a party, the rights of the parties Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
shall as nearly as possible be the same, and judgement may be given and costs
awarded on either side, as in a suit between subject and subject.”
The term “suit” “includes any action or original proceedings between parties”: s 2 of the Judiciary
Act. It is arguable that a dispute between parties in the Tenancy Tribunal is a “suit” as defined.
But section 64 of the Judiciary Act only applies to proceedings in a Court exercising federal
jurisdiction: see Re Residential Tenancies Tribunal of New South Wales & Ors; Ex Parte Defence
Housing Authority (1997) 146 ALR 495, at pp 515-516 (Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ),
525-6 (McHugh J), 536 (Gummow J) and 566-7 (Kirby J). See also China Ocean Shipping Co.
v South Australia (1979) 145 CLR 172 at pp 223-4. Leaving aside the issue whether the
Tenancy Tribunal is a “Court” for this purpose, it is unarguable that the Tenancy Tribunal does not
exercise federal jurisdiction.
In order to elucidate which of the two possible interpretations of s 27 of the Self Government Act
was that which was intended by the Parliament, it is legitimate to examine the repercussions of the
different alternatives. A matter of some concern in that regard was the submission by the
respondent that s 27 of the Self Government Act impliedly repeals s 64 of the Judiciary Act 1903
to the extent that s 64 would otherwise apply the provisions of ACT enactments to entities such as
the respondent that are within the shield of the Crown in the right of the Commonwealth.
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
For the reasons I have given it is unnecessary to determine finally whether s 27 of the Self
Government Act would have any such effect in proceedings before a Court exercising federal
jurisdiction. But it appears unlikely that any such consequence is inevitable if one accepts the
interpretation of s 27 of the Self Government Act urged by the respondent. Both s 27 of the Self
Government Act and s 64 of the Judiciary Act can be given effect. There will be many suits in
which the Commonwealth is a party brought before Courts exercising federal jurisdiction in the
Territory in which the executive capacities of the Commonwealth are not sought to be bound in
either sense referred to. However, as I have said, the exact relationship between s 27 of the Self
Government Act and s 64 of the Judiciary Act does not require definition in these proceedings.
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
THE COMMONWEALTH PLACES (APPLICATION OF LAWS) ACT 1970
Section 3 of the Commonwealth Places (Application of Laws) Act 1970 defines
“Commonwealth place” to mean:
“ a place (not being the seat of government) with respect to which the Parliament, by
virtue of section 52 of the Constitution has, subject to the Constitution, exclusive
powers to make laws for the peace, order and good government of the
Commonwealth.”
Section 4(1) of the Act provides:
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
“ The provision of the laws of a State as in force at a time (whether before or after the
commencement of this Act) apply, or shall be deemed to have applied, in accordance
with their tenor, at that time and in relation to each place in that State that is or was a
Commonwealth place at that time.”
As Toohey J observed in Svikart v Stewart (1994) 181 CLR 548 at p 569: “Section 4 applies
only to the laws of a state; it has nothing to say as to the laws of a Territory.”
The Commonwealth Places (Application of Laws) Act 1970 therefore cannot assist the
applicant’s case.
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
SECTION 27: CONCLUSION
The proposition that the executive power of the Commonwealth under section 61 of the Constitution
can only be exercised by the Commonwealth and is beyond the reach of any other body politic
within the Federation is so fundamental that it is impossible to believe that the Commonwealth
Parliament felt it necessary to restate this principle, and nothing more, in enacting s 27 of the Self
Government Act.
It follows from this proposition that it is inherently unlikely that the Commonwealth Parliament would
enact a provision (s 27 Self Government Act) to prohibit the ACT Legislative Assembly from
doing something it never had the power to do.
Inevitably, the Tribunal concludes that s 27 of the Self Government Act is not intended to merely
provide that ACT enactments are not to bind the Commonwealth Crown in the exercise of its
functions and capacities unless such an enactment is specified by Regulation. It is the clear intention
of s 27 that ACT enactments are not to bind the Commonwealth Crown in any capacity, including
regulating ordinary transactions into which the Crown may choose to enter, unless the enactment is
specified by regulation.
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Accordingly, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to hear the dispute between the applicant and the
respondent.
SECTION 28: SELF GOVERNMENT ACT
In view of my decision with respect to s 27 of the Self Government Act it is strictly unnecessary for
me to consider whether s 28 of the Self Government Act applies to deprive the Tribunal of
jurisdiction to hear this dispute. However, it is desirable to deal with the issue, if only to allow all
issues to be ventilated on appeal, if such should eventuate. Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
The respondent in its submissions referred to the provisions of the Federal Airports Corporation
Act 1986. The respondent submitted that the land in Federal Airports was a major Commonwealth
asset. The respondent submitted it is in nature of airports that competing land uses must be planned
and coordinated and the Federal Airports Corporation Act 1986 confers that function on the
Federal Airports Corporation. It was submitted that the Federal Airports Corporation Act
provides a detailed scheme for the management and coordination of planning of airports including
conferring on the corporation a power to make by-laws. It was the submission of the respondent
that the Federal Airports Corporation Act covers the field of decision making about how the land
within Federal Airports should be used and who should be granted leases over land within those
airports and leaves no room for the subjection of land use decisions to discretionary orders under
the Tenancy Tribunal Act. The applicant, supported by the ACT Attorney-General, submitted
that s 28 of the Self Government Act did not deprive the Tribunal of jurisdiction to hear this
dispute. The interpretation ofs 28 of the Self Government Act has been the subject of a decision in
the Administrative Appeals Tribunal in the matter of Peter John Jacob v Discrimination
Commissioner and Attorney General, a decision of 9 August 1996. In that matter President Curtis
sitting as the ACT AAT stated: “the effect of this section is that a law of the Territory is inconsistent
with a law of the Commonwealth only to the extent to which the two laws are not able to operate
concurrently.... This clearly represents an intention by the Commonwealth Parliament that the
“covering the field test” should not apply as between the Commonwealth and Territory law.”
+LIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust
As President Curtis stated in that decision it is only at the point of direct inconsistency where
Commonwealth law and Territory law deal with the same subject matter and it is not possible to
comply with both laws that the Commonwealth law prevails over the Territory law.
Some assistance is gained by referring to a similar provision being s 75(1) of the Trade Practices
Act 1974. This provides:
“Except as provided by subsection (2), this part is not intended to exclude or limit the
concurrent operation of any law of a State or Territory.”
In the Queen v Credit Tribunal Ex Parte GMAC (1977) 137 CLR 545, His Honour AtustLI AustLll AustLI AustLi
Justice Murphy in considering this section stated:
“Section 75 of the Act expresses the intent that state laws on the subject dealt with in
“Part V - Consumer Protection” are not to be precluded except where they directly
collide with the provisions of the Act. As there is no direct collision .... there is no
inconsistency.” (In that regard see also the decision of Gummow J in Grace Brothers
v Magistrates, Local Court of NSW (1988) 84 ALR 492.)
The covering the field test does not apply to s 28 of the Self Government Act. There is nothing in
the Federal Airports Corporation Act which is directly inconsistent with the provisions of the
Tenancy Tribunal Act. There is no point at which it is not possible to comply with both laws.
Therefore I am satisfied that s 28 of the Self Government Act does not preclude the Tribunal from
dealing with the dispute.
SUMMARY
Section 28 of the Self Government Act does not preclude the Tribunal from hearing this dispute.
However, section 27 of the Self Government Act does operate to deny jurisdiction to the Tribunal
to hear the dispute. The applicant is therefore required to bring any claim it may have against the
respondent before the ordinary Courts of the Territory.
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi