UstLll AustLII AustLI
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
CITATION: Phillip Cao v Vaneet Grover [2008] ACTRTT (22)
RT 489 of 2008
Catchwords: Water abstraction charges
Tribunal: A. Anforth, Member
Date: +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust 21 October 2008
PHILLIP CAO
(Applicant/Lessor)
AND:
VANEET GROVER
(Respondent/Tenant)
DECISION
Tribunal :A. Anforth, Member
Date :21 October 2008
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Decision :
1. The Respondent/tenant is to pay the Applicant/lessor the sum of $413.26.
2. The Office of Rental Bond is to deduct this sum from the bond held and pay the
sum to the Applicant/lessor with the balance to be paid to the Respondent/tenant.
3. The Respondent/tenant is not required to pay any of the outstanding water
abstraction charge or network facilities tax.
…………………………….
Member
PHILLIP CAO
(Applicant/Lessor)
AND
VANEET GROVER
(Respondent/Tenant)
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. This matter concerned residential premises at 61 Matina Street, Narrabundah in
the ACT. The tenancy commenced on 16 August 2007 for a period of 12 months
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! at a rent of $340 per week. A bond of $1360 was paid and lodged with the Office
of Rental Bond. This tenancy followed immediately from a prior tenancy of 12
months between the same parties on the same terms.
2. The lease contained a clause which provided:
10. The tenant need to pay the expenditure of the house, such as electricity, gas and phone bill,
also the water bill. Landlord to pay the sewerage fee.
3. On 12 June 2008 the Applicant/lessor filed an application with the Tribunal. The
particulars of the complaint were in the following terms:
Summary of Particulars Issues in dispute
1. Failure to pay water bills on 3 separate occasions.
.ustLI AustLI AustLI
2. Damage to the rear security door -failure to rectify and written repudiation of responsibility.
3. Failure to vacate despite formal written notice.
Nature of relief sought
1. Warrant for eviction.
2. Replacement of rear security door including installation
3. Payment of unpaid water bills before vacating.
History of dispute
1. Tenancy agreement between Tenant and Lessor's agents
1.1 The Tenant signed a lease agreement on the 16th of August 2007 for a lease from the 11th of August
2007 to 10th of August 2008 for the amount of $340.00 per week.
1.2 This was a renewal of a previous lease agreement which was under similar conditions. The Lessor
(Phillip Cao) was represented by Andrew Yan (who in conjunction with Ling Ling Cao has acted for the
Lessor during both leases).
-. A.IctLll istLI AustLII AustLI
1.3 The Lease agreement includes a clause (no. 11) whereby either party can terminate the lease at any
time with two weeks notice.
1.4 Neither Andrew Yan nor the Lessor is available, the Lessor is currently represented by Jason Yan
and Ling Ling Cao under a power of attorney.
2. 1 st Violation of tenancy agreement - unpaid water bill
2.1 Clause 10 of the Lease agreement states that the tenant will pay for electricity, gas, phone and water
and states that the Lessor will pay sewerage fees. The water bill consisted of sewerage and water
consumption and supply fees and was paid in whole by the Lessor who would then invoice the tenant for
consumption related water charges.
2.2 This arrangement had been the accepted practice by the tenant until the end of 2007 when the tenant
began ignoring the agents written and oral requests for payment of water consumption bills. The first
such case was an invoice issued towards the end of November 2007 for $151.92. This original invoice
was confirmed to have been received by the tenants during subsequent conversations with the agents in
January where the tenant and his wife were asked why the bill was not paid.
2.3 This began a series of written correspondence during which the tenants initially failed to
address the matter of the unpaid water bill which was brought to their attention - and was the
original cause of the communications by the agents; and which als o involved a dispute over
property damage (the rear security door of the property, discussed in paragraph 3).
tLIIAustLIJ
2.4 During the correspondence, the tenants were offered the opportunity to jointly t erminate the
tenancy due to their failure to rectify damage to property and the issue of unpaid bills in
conjunction to the continual decline of the relationship, with the offer of a positive reference if the
dispute could be resolved quickly.
2.5 Our bank records show that the outstanding bill was paid shortly after our request to rectify: on
the 16th January 2008, nearly 6 weeks after the original request for payment.
3 2 nd Violation of tenancy agreement -Damage to the rear security door, failure to rectify & failure
to vacate when given notice
3.1 In late 2007, the tenant requested the agents (Andrew Yan & Ling Ling Cao) to view damage to
the backdoor, they noticed that three screws were missing, which they believed could be rectified
ustLII AustLI AustLi
with a screw-driver, and which did not impact on the functioning or integrity of the door.
3.2 About a fortnight later when they returned to the property again they discovered the back door
was on the ground with its steel hinges twisted, preventing re-attachment since it had appeared to
have been pulled down.
3.3 Both Andrew Yan & Ling Ling Cao immediately informed the tenants of their view at this
inspection of the damage, that given the state of the door, the damage was clearly a result of
unwarranted force and showed signs deliberate damage; and it was therefore the tenants
responsibility to repair the damage. The tenant's responded that they were not damaging the house
but did not offer an explanation as to the cause of the significant damage when asked.
3.4 Approximately 2 weeks later the Tenants contacted the Agents by phone at approximately 7am
demanding that damage to the rear door be fixed. The agents responded by reiterating that the
damage showed signs of unreasonable force being applied to the door and it was therefore the
responsibility of the tenant to repair it.
3.5 When the tenant's demands were rebuffed, the tenant then repudiated the agent's authority to
act - by claiming that Ling Ling Cao had no right to talk or reject his request since they were not
the owner of the property - and became very loud and abusive towards the agent.
3.6 Shortly afterwards the agents began written correspondence with the tenants in early January
2008 during which time the tenants responded to the requests for payment of the water bill and
repairs to the back door by obfuscating their responsibility (described below in para 3.7). After
several requests for the tenants to repair the damage, the back door was then raised as being a result
of Lessor neglect.
3.7 During the correspondence they continually declined responsibility for repairs to the rear door
by citing alternating reasons between the Lessor's obligation to keep the premises secure; and the
inconvenience of not being able to ventilate the house through the back door while ignoring the
original issue of the tenant's culpability for the damage.
3.8 The tenants were informed that even if they reasonably believed the damage to the door was
not directly their fault, they had a duty to prevent negligent damage including from their guests as
well as a duty to mitigate any existing damage that did occur. However given the twisting and the
type of damage to the heavy steel frame that was witnessed by the agents and the fact that the door
was on the ground, they were unequivocally informed that the damage was the tenant's
responsibility.
3.9 An offer to voluntary terminate the lease were made by the Lessor's agents due to the
continuing failure of the tenants to accept responsibility for damage to the rear security door in
conjunction with the failure to pay their water bill in a reasonable timeframe; combined with the
clear deterioration of the relationship between the parties.
3.10 They responded with demonstrably false claims about the promptness with which they paid
their bills. Bank statement show that six weeks had elapsed before payment of the requested
tLIIAustLIJ amount. This was accompanied by their view that they were not obliged to pay certain metered
amounts on the water bill which related to their consumption of water. This is addressed later at
paragraph 4.
3.11 A formal request to vacate was made due to their repeated written and oral repudiation of the
requests to rectify damage to the property (by letter of 23 January 2008). This was done twice, with
the second request made under the standard legally proscribed form. The tenant contacted us by
phone to tell us that there was no alternate accommodation available -though the Tenant admitted
they had not begun searching.
3.12 They were informed both in the original letters and over the phone in a conversation with
Jason Yan (who would later assume Andrew Yan's role in the coming months as an agent for the
Lessor) that the period to vacate was flexible and could be extended to assist them in finding
alternate accommodation. They responded that they would require it extended until the end of the AUSEL !!
lease and refused to negotiate an alternate time frame.
3.13 The tenants have never disputed in correspondence that the door was in good condition and
could be closed when the property was delivered nearly 2 years ago under their first lease and at the ASELII
beginning of the second lease.
4 History of tenancy
4.1 During the course of the tenancy, numerous repairs have been made including the replacement
of a new toilet and a new oven (which was then rapidly damaged requiring professional warranty
repairs).
4.2 Throughout the tenancy the Lessor's agents have tolerated a great deal of damage to the
property and have paid for repairs which they have not always believed to have been reasonable.
4.3 The agents have also found the tenants to be less than forthcoming in their communications
including making demonstrably false and misleading statements regarding their payment of bills or
their knowledge of property damage heretofore mentioned as well as the dire difficulty in finding
alternate accommodation despite little evidence of any genuine attempt being made.
4.4 The Lessor's agents also suspect that the tenant is subletting rooms in the property to
acquaintances without approval due to repeated comments about the tenants guests and the
continual presence of the tenants adult relative.
4.5 The tenant was phoned by Ling Ling Cao, on the 20th of March 2008, to enquire if they had
found alternate accommodation. The tenant's wife responded that they had not begun searching and
were not vacating. They also demanded that we provide them with alternate accommodation if we
wanted them to move out and then made a point of ridiculing Ling Ling Cao's English skills as
poor.
4.6 Two days later the tenants organised plumbing repairs without initially contacting the Lessor's
agents, although the repairs were paid by the Lessor.When they were eventually contacted before
the repairs commenced, they were unwilling to turn off the water supply while this water was
being wasted failed to give an adequate reason. They have since failed to pay their water bill for
this period.
4.7 It is our belief a key reason for the failure of the tenant to vacate is not their legitimate belief
that they have acted properly or difficulty in seeking alternate accommodation but a reluctance to
relinquish the convenience of living in the next suburb to the tenant's work (Fyshwick).
5 3 rd & 4th Violation of tenancy agreement -Failure to pay water bill x 2.
5.1 Although the original disputed water bill were eventually paid 6 weeks late, the next water bill
for $166.32 which was invoiced on the 27th of February, has remained unpaid after more than 4
months.
tLIIAustLIJ 5.2 The tenant has definitely received the invoice since it was enclosed with another letter which
specified Jason Yan as taking over the responsibilities of Andrew Yan along with a contact
number. This number has subsequently been used by the tenant to inform the agent of the plumbing
repairs mentioned in paragraph 4.6.
5.3 This has been followed by another unpaid water bill which was invoiced for $ 177.87 on the 29thwhich
remains unpaid despite the expiry of the two weeks notice to pay.
5.4 Previously the tenant has raised the issue that water network tax and abstraction fees are not the
responsibility of the tenant since they are fees and rates. It is the agents belief that these are the tenants
responsibility for the following reasons:
i. The ACT government has declared in subordinate legislation that that the abstraction fee and
water network tax are consumption fees which "may be passed on in full to consumers of utility
services"( Independent Competition and Regulatory Commission (Water Abstraction Charge)
.ustLII AustLI AustLI
Declaration 2003 (No 1); Independent Competition and Regulatory Commission (Utilities
(Network Facilities Tax)) Declaration 2006 (No 1))
ii. Both the abstraction fee and water network tax are metered amounts and are charged pro-rata on
water consumption at the rate of $0.55 per kL and $0.09 per kL respectively. This would make it a
metered fee directly proportional to the consumption of water as a good/service by the tenant rather
than a tax on the premises.
Under clause 46 of the standard residential tenancy terms the tenant is responsible for "all charges
associated with the consumption of services".
Although clause 42 (a) of the standard residential tenancy terms states that the lessor is responsible
for "rates and taxes relating to the premises", this does not describe the aforementioned fees which
are levied pro-rata on tenant consumption of goods and services rather than on the premises itself.
The RTT case of Baird v Campbell & Ors 2005 states that the abstraction charge is a Lessor
responsibility - however the actual reasoning at paragraph 57 and 70 is very limited and makes no
reference to the aforementioned subordinate legislation which directly declares the contrary. It
appears that the reasoning in this case is invalid since it was made in the absence of applicable law.
The case also fails to make any distinction between fees & taxes on the un-metered supply fees
which are the Lessor's responsibility and those associated with metered consumption which would
normally be paid by the tenant.
iii. The explanatory notes to the aforementioned regulations as well as the ACTEWAGL web site
explains the abstraction fee as part of A.C.T. governments water management policy in response
to the scarcity and environmental impact of water usage.
If the impact of these fees were to be on a party other than the final consumer, then the
financial disincentive imposed by the Government's water policy would be removed since
Lessors have limited means of influencing tenant water consumption during a lease other than
by passing on these charges.
iv. The same network taxes are also levied pro-rata upon electricity consumption which,
similar to water consumption, is a tenant responsibility. This tax on water is identical, and
should be treated in the same way - as the tenant's responsibility.
For these reasons the water abstraction fees and the water network supply tax are in fact the
tenant's responsibility.
5.5 The overdue water bills also include the base usage fees which have never been contested by
the tenant as being a tenant responsibility.
5.6 The failure to pay would constitute the third & forth violation of the tenancy agreement (the
fifth if the tenant is in fact subletting the property as is suspected). This is in addition to the two
notice's to vacate served after the second violation which has been ignored.
tLIIAustLIJ
Since the tenant has repeatedly refused to vacate the property despite our numerous requests and
written notices -the earliest being 16th February 2008 the latest being 29th May 2008 - we are
therefore requesting a warrant of eviction in addition to payment of the water bills in full and repair
of damage.
4. Annexed to the application was a copy of the lessor’s letter of 10 January 2008 to
the tenant which read:
I am writing in response to your letters dated 7 January 2008. With regard to our visit, we were in
Matina street after shopping and only stopped in the driveway after noticing that the premises
unexpectedly appeared inhabited despite our conversation in which you explained you would be
away from your home and that no-one would be available to discuss with us any matters.
ustLII AustLI AustLI
My wife and I had not alighted from our vehicle when your wife greeted us in our car and spoke
with us for less than 5 minutes, during which time we expressed our concern that the water bill,
which she confirmed to have received, has remained unpaid. We did not enter the premises nor did
we have any intention of doing so. We do not consider this brief conversation unreasonable
interference - any more so than a phone call- as you state, and we have no intention of interfering in
any such manner.
At this point I would like to draw your attention to the matter of the unpaid water bill for $151.92
for consumption related water charges, which we drew to your attention in late November 2007 and
which remains unaddressed and unpaid.
We have given ample opportunity to comply and have made numerous phone calls in addition to
our written request. The latest request being our conversation with your wife while we were in our
car. It is concerning to us that it was only after we raised this issue with your wife that she began to
request repairs as a response, including matters such as the mowing of the grass and trimming of
foliage - matters which would be normally considered part of the upkeep of the property by the
tenant, we have even loaned to you a weed trimmer to assist in this end.
On this issue we also consider that the matter of the toilet tissue paper hanger to be a minor matters
which is part of the normal upkeep of the property. Clause 55(3) of the agreement does not require
the notification of the land lord for anything that an ordinary tenant would reasonably be expected
to do, for example, changing a light globe or a fuse. We consider that the toilet tissue paper hanger
in the laundry to fall within this category.
tl. AustLll AustLII AustL
With regard to the back yard screen door, we would also like to draw to your attention the general
duty upon tenants on discovering damage, whether at fault or not, to mitigate the repairs required
under the Residential Tenancies Act.
However our responsibility to repair on this matter is limited since at the commencement of the
lease the screen door was in good condition and did not require any such repairs. We consider the
initial damage, and total removal of the door from its hinges to be unreasonable especially given
clear the signs of force on the door, the rapid deterioration of the door until the type of damage we
observed.
That is, the initial condition of the door on commencement of the lease compared to the type of
damage subsequently occurring under your tenancy is highly indicative of unreasonable damage
and outside any fair usage of the door.
Under Clause 63(a) of the agreement - during the tenancy, the tenant must not intentionally or
negligently damage the premises or permit such damage.
Consequently we consider the repair to be the total responsibility of the tenant and expect the tenant
to make necessary repairs, since we are not responsible for such deliberate/negligent damage. We
remind you that we have made this view clear on previous occasions regarding this damage.
We re-iterate our concern that our requests for payment of agreed bills under the signed agreement
tLIIAustLIJ such as water consumption are met with evasion and unexpected requests for repairs including
many minor matters that are the responsibility of the tenant.
Over the course of your tenancy, I have already made several major repairs and have replaced a
toilet, an oven and a wardrobe door, not all of which I believed was fair and reasonable.
Given your repeated failure to accept responsibility for property damage that is your responsibility,
the failure to mitigate damage when it does occur and the failure to pay the outstanding bills
despite numerous requests; and given our joint disquiet over this lease we believe it would be best if
we were to agree to voluntarily terminate the tenancy. We suggest the property to be vacated no
later than the 8thFebruary 2008, particularly since December - January offers the best opportunity to
find alternate rental accommodation in Canberra due to the expiry of many leases for students and
out of state professionals.
Under the Residential Tenancies Act, such damage as we have observed to the property in addition
to the failure to pay the water consumption bill- despite ample notice and opportunity to remedy-is
grounds for an application to the residential tenancy tribunal for forcible termination. Must!Il ustLll AustLI AustLi
Before the release of your bond we expect that the outstanding amount for water to be paid, rent to
paid up and the screen door and any other damage to be fixed and restored and the property to be
left clean.
5. Annexed to the application were the following documents:
(a) A water bill for the period 14/8/07-20/11/07 for the premises in the sum of
$278 composed of $102.64 for consumption; $122.19 for sewerage supply
charge and water supply charge; $4.50 for sewer network tax; $6.93 for
water network tax; $42.35 for water abstraction charge.
(b) A water bill for the period 31/12/07-31/3/08 for the premises in the sum of
$293 composed of $120.24 for consumption; $122.19 for sewerage and
water supply charge; $4.50 for sewer network tax; $6.48 for water network
tax; $39.60 for water abstraction charges.
tl AustLll AustLll AustL
AustLII AustLI
(c) A letter from the lessor to the tenant dated 27 February 2008 attaching the
water bill immediately above and asking for payment of $166.32 being the
consumption, water network tax and the water abstraction charge.
(d) A water bill for the period 13/2/08-14/05/08 for the premises in the sum of
$304 being $128.59 for consumption; $122.19 for sewer and water supply
charge; $4.50 for sewer network tax, $6.93 for water network tax; and
$42.35 for the water abstraction charge.
(e) A letter of 29 May 2008 from the lessor to the tenant asking for payment
of the above water bill in the amount of $177.87.
6. The application annexed a copy of a notice of termination from the lessor to the
tenant dated 23 January 2008 requiring possession on or before 16 Febraury 2008
on the ground that the tenants failed to rectify the damage to the back door and the
lessors “genuine belief that the tenant will recklessly cause or permit further
damage to the property”. Attached to the notice of termination was an Australian
Post registered post receipt indicating postage on 10 January 2008.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi
7. The application and annexures were served on the tenant by the Registrar with a
notice listing the matter for 15 July 2008.
8. On 30 June 2008 the tenant filed his response to the lessors claim which included
a range of counter claims against the lessor. The tenant’s response read:
This is in reference to the notice reference no RT489 of 2008 issued to us on 20th June 2008 for
termination of tenancy agreement for my rental place 61 - Matina Street, Narrabundah.
Our Landlord has accused us of violating few rental agreements. I would like to draw your
attention on each of the following but before that I would like to tell you how it all started.
Our landlord has violated a very basic agreement in the rental tenancy agreement of visiting
the premises without the permission.
In 1st week of January our landlord showed desire to visit the premises on the phone but as we had ustLII AustLI AustLI
some guest visiting us from overseas and it was Sunday that day so we were going out to show
them around. We told our tenant that today is not a good day to come but he is more than
welcome to come and visit the premises any other day.
We also advised our landlord that we will be leaving the house around 1530 hrs but we got late
for some reason and for our surprise our landlord came to our house at 1600 hrs. As he was
already informed that no one will be at home so should we conclude that he was going to visit the
premises in our absence?
We sent a letter to him on 7 th January 2008 reminding him of the Clause 52 imposes an obligation
on the landlord to guarantee that they shall not cause or permit any interference with the
reasonable peace, comfort or privacy of the tenant.
Our landlord has violated rental agreement by not providing the rental place in the vacant
position.
When we rented the house in August 2006 there were pile of rubbish including 2 mattresses were
sitting in the backyard which was the leftover from the previous tenants. Also half of the Garage
is filled with landlords stuff or the stuff left by previous tenants. Our landlord promised us that he
will arrange something to get rid of the rubbish in backyard and to clean the garage as well. From
last 2 years we have been made hundreds of promises that he will get it clean. He didn't care to
get rid of that stuff so we had to clean his rubbish from the back yard as our kids couldn't play in
the backyard because of that rubbish. His stuff is still lying in the garage. At first place only we
tl. AustLll AustLII AustL
shouldn't have paid full rent as we were not provided with the vacant house. We didn't want to
create any issue and we have been paying the full rent since beginning.
Now I would like to draw you attentions on other matters 1 st Violation of tenancy agreement
- unpaid water bill
We have been living at 61 - Matina Street, Narrabundah from August 2006 and all the bills have
been paid without any delay. The situation in which we failed to pay the water bills arose when
our rear security door was came out of the frame. We advised the same to the landlord and he
blamed us for forcefully bringing the door to the ground. At that time also we were paying all the
bills without any delay. Then, he accused us of not paying the last water bill, which we never
received. But, as he mentioned about that bill in his letter and also sent us that bill, we paid it
straight way.
As the door matter was not resolved so we went to the Tenant Advice Services to seek advice. We
told them about the situation and also showed them our water bills. The consultant had look into
our water bills also the bill in question. As per the consultant at the rental Tenant Advice
Services, our landlord was charging us the water network tax and water abstraction amount as
well which he is not supposed to charge us. We have been advised by the consultant that it's the
landlord responsibility to pay the water network tax and water abstraction charges.
We were not aware of that before so we contacted the landlord and advised them of the same and
requested them to send us all the previous bills so we can calculate how much we paid extra so
tLIIAustLIJ far. We sent a letter to the landlord on 21st January and requested the landlord to pay the access
amount back which we have paid earlier for water network tax and water abstraction charges and
he failed to do so. In fact we contacted the ActewAGL enquiring about the basis of those taxes
and we were informed that they charge these taxes for maintenance of dams etc. and is generally
paid by Landlord. We informed our landlord the same on phone and told him again that if he can
bring any document saying that tenant has to pay those taxes, we are ready to pay those as we
were paying before. But he never came back.
Regarding notice to vacate — 2 nd Violation of Agreement.
Regarding his notice to vacate, we informed him by our later dated 7 February telling him that
his notice to vacate is invalid as we haven't damaged his property. There is no valid reason for
vacating the house till end of lease.
ustLII AustLI AustLi
2 nd Violation of tenancy agreement -Damage to the rear security door, failure to
The house in which we are living is very old. All the doors in the house have become loosen from
the hinges as the wooden frame of the door are getting rusted. Our landlord visited us in early
November; at that time we showed him all the doors and he accepted that doors are getting loosen
from the hinges. He fixed the door of bedroom 2 but he couldn't fix the back door. He tried to fix
it by hammering the screws in the screw holes but the screws didn't fix as the screw holes gone
bigger in size due to the rust. He promised us that he will get the door fixed within a week's time.
In spite of our repeated requests he never fixed the back door and one day it broke down itself.
Now he has blamed us for forcefully bringing the door down. I don't think any sensible person
will bring his house door down. We had to face a lot of trouble because of that broken door. We
had 2 small kids in the house and we always kept the house in clean and in hygienic state. It was
summers at that time and we couldn't leave the wooden back door open during the day as flies
and ants come into the house. There is no provision to let the air pass through house as the rear
back door was broken and that was the only door which has fly screen on it.
As per the Rental Tenancies -The Renting book, there is a clause for urgent repairs. As per that
clause it is the tenant's responsibility to advice the landlord of any urgent repairs and it is the
landlord's responsibility to carry out the repairs, hi Our case our landlord already knew about it
but he failed to fix the problem.
History of tenancy
Our tenant has written that "During the course of tenancy, numerous repairs have been made
including the replacement of a new toilet and a new oven (which was then rapidly damaged
requiring professional warranty repairs)" also he has mentioned "Throughout the tenancy
the Lessor's agent have tolerated a great deal of damage to the property and have paid for
the repairs which then have not always believed to have been reasonable"
I would like to tell you that when we rented this place Toilet flush tank and gas oven was not in
working state. So to put the house on rent I think it was the landlord responsibility only to get the
oven and toilet tank fixed. No tenant will get those things fixed to get the house on rent. About
the rapidly damaging the property, anyone is welcome to the house to have a look and see if any
damage has been done. We did require a repair to the gas oven once because one of the hot plate
wasn't turning off as there was a fault in its knob. Why would we break the knob and then bear
the trouble of turning the gas line off from the main switch every time as we cant leave the hot
plate on all the time.
In April we had a problem with our hot water tap in the bathroom as it wasn't shutting off. We
tried to fix it but we couldn't. We informed our landlord's agent about the same and advised him
that we are calling Plumbing Doctor to come and fix the tap as we can't let the water get wasted.
Plumber fixed the Tap and after that Jason told us that we are supposed to take his permission
before carrying out any repairs. We did advise him of the problem before calling the plumber
and he even told us to wait for 15 minutes and he will try to arrange someone who won't
charge much. As it was Easter weekend no one was available except the Plumbing Doctor.
Even if I wasn't able to get in touch with Jason I would have called the plumber anyways to get
the tap fixed as the repair was of urgent nature and I think anyone would have done the same.
tLIIAustLIJ
I would be really happy to know what other numerous repairs landlord have carried out in
last 2 years. I would really appreciate if Landlord can provide me a list of repairs which
they have carried out on the premises.
Regarding subletting rooms in the property without approval, I would like to say that all the
persons living on the persons have signed the lease agreement with the landlord and they are
authorized to live their as per the Lease Agreement.
Our Landlord thinks that my job is in Fyshwick that's why we are not vacating the premises. I
would like to let the tenant know that my brother who is living at the same premises works in
Belconnen. How can this reason be justified that I work in Fyshwick that's why we are not
vacating the property.
3 rd and 4 th Violation of tenancy agreement - Failure to pay water bill X 2
About this Tenancy agreement Violation, I have mentioned everything above in 1 st Violation of stLI Aust !!! AustLll AustLi
tenancy agreement - unpaid water bill
9. Annexed to the tenant’s response were copies of three letter from the tenant to the
lessor dated 7 January 2008 and a letter from the tenant to the lessor of 21 January
2008 which read:
(First letter of 7 Janua ry 2008)
This is in refere nc e to your visit to our rented premise s at 61, Matina Street, Narra bun da h on
Sunda y, January 6'2008 late after noo n (about 1600 Mrs).
I would like your attentio n to the teleph onic conve rsation around 1.5 hours (about 1400 Mrs) befor e
your visit on same day during which you showe d your desire to visit the place. I told you clearly
that I have some oversea s guests in my place and I am leavin g home in 20-30 minutes times and it
would be better if you come some other day for which you said ok.
In spite of above , You visited our place aroun d 1600 hrs and it was by chanc e that our progra m was
delaye d and we saw you comin g to our house and my wife has to cancel her program and she stayed
home to attend you as you arrived without our consent. If we had left in time, then you would have
visited the premise s without our presen ce since you hold the second keys.
I would like to remind you that as per ACT Reside ntial Tena ncie s Act,
Clause 52 imposes an obligation on the landlord to guarantee that they shall not cause or
permit any interference with the reasonable peace, comfort or privacy of the tenant
Your visits without our mutual agree m ent are totally unjustifie d and we have take n it as very
serious thereb y affectin g our privac y as you visited the place even I told you that we are going out.
This is a serious breach of Tenanc y Act.
You are reque ste d to please not repeat this in future, failing which I have no option left other than
taking the matter to Tribu nal.
(Seco nd letter of 7 January 2008)
Please refer to your letter and notice to vacate dated 23rd Janua ry'08, we would like to inform you
that we will not be vacating the premise s becau se your notice to vacate is not valid as advise d by
Tenants Advice Service s, Canbe rra.
As alread y discusse d with you, we have not damag ed your door and premise s at all.
tLIIAustLIJ AL (The third letter of 7 Januar y 2008)
This is in regard s to the repairs to be done in your house which we are renting since August'200 6 at
61, Matina Street, Narrab und ah .
There are certain repairs, which had to be carrie d out since we moved in and for which you have
not done anything in spite of our repeate d requests. Also there are some repairs which have come in
last few months becau se they were not corre cted at first place and for them again you have not done
anything. In fact you have refuse d to get them done as conve ye d by you to my wife during you
recent unauth orised visit on Sunda y, Janua ry 6'2008.
The repairs, which require immedia te attenda nc e, are as follow s:
1. Rubbish (inclu din g mattresse s) leftover by last tenants lying at the backya rd should be removed
immediately as it has and is creating unhygienic living conditions, especia lly we havin g small kids AUSEL !!
playin g in the backya rd. We are telling you to arran ge to remove the rubbish since beginning of
leave but you have never acted upon our request.
2. Toilet Tissue Paper hanger in the laund ry/ secon d toilet to be fixed immediate ly as you have left ASELII
that hanger aroun d a year before and never bothere d to arrang e to fix that.
3. The back door, which came down since it was not, attende d right from the beginning . The holes
in the hinges have gone big and that has led to falling of door. This was shown to you during your
visit to house 2 months before . After having a careful look at other doors and noticing the same
proble m with other doors as well, you fixed them tempora rily by hamm e rin g the screw s. For this
door, you agree d that you will arran ge to get it fixed in a week's time but that week never came .
As it is summ er time and we require that door in order to have air crossing in the house , this is a
serious proble m in view of small kids at home as we can't leave that space open. Also, the
spring/hyd ra ulic arrang em e nt for auto closure of this door is not workin g since beginnin g of lease .
Apart from above , there are some minor repairs, which are to be done and conve yed to you.
Please refer to the Clause 55, which states that you as landlo rd have to mainta in the premise s in
reason able state of repair and since all the above repairs are of urgent nature and as per Clause 60,
landlord is require d to arrange to get these repairs done in short time.
In above of above, I request you to please arrange to get above mentione d repairs done in 2 weeks
time consid ering them of urgent nature.
AustLII AustLI
(The letter of 21 January 2008)
This is in respo nse to your letter on 10th Januar y. I would like to draw you attentio n as follow s:
1. In regards to your proposal for mutual termination of the lease agree m e nt, I would like to let
you know that we don't acce pt your offer for mutual termination of the lease agree m ent.
2. I would also like to draw your attention on the repairs, which need to be done in the house and
few other things as well. As far as the door is conce rne d, when we rented the premises all the doors
was not in the good conditio n. When we reque ste d you to get the door fixed you visited our
premise s and fixed the door in Bedro om no 2 as that door was also going to come out soon and you
told us that you will get the back door fixed ASAP. As per the ACT Reside ntia l Tenan cie s Act, it is
the landlo rd's respon sibility to provide secur e premises and to fix the urgent repairs. Woode n door
at the back not secure enoug h as it's lock is also loose, we fixed it befor e but it still remains the
same. In that scenario anyone can break into the house, as the Iron door is not there which provide s
main protec tion .
3. I would also like to draw your attention on the rubbish sitting in the backya rd and also in the
garage . It has been sitting there since the day we rente d the premise s and you told us that you'll get
rid of it soon. We can't utilise the full space of garage because of that and beca use of the rubbish
sitting in the backy ar d our kids can't play in the backy ar d. It is the Landlord's respon sibility to
provide a totally vacant premises to the tenant.
tLIIAustLIJ
4. Also regarding the Wate r charge s, I would like to let you know that we have always paid the
Wate r Charge s as advise d by you. This time also, we have paid the amount of $ 152.92 on receipt
of Bill attache d with your letter dated Janua ry 10'2008 . Althoug h, I have always paid the bill as per
you advic e, but we have realised that you have over charge d us for the Water rates and Taxes as
well. As per the Clause 42 and 46 we are only supposed to pay the Wate r Consum ption Charge s not
the Rates and Taxe s. It is the Landlord's responsibility to pay the Taxes and rates. So if you could
please credit us with extra amount which you have was charge d equal to amou nt of $49.2 8
(Charg ed as Wate r Netw or k Tax & Water Abstra ction Charge in last bill). My accou nt details are
as follow s:
Account Name : Vane et Grave r
Accou nt Bank: Comm o nw ea lth Bank.
BSB NO: 063011 AUSEL !!
Acco unt No: 1029800 3
Also, it will be highly appre ciate d if you can provide us the copies of previo us water bills also, so
that we can check for the Wate r Charge s paid and seek back claim in case we have paid anything ASELII
extra before too.
5. About the grass mowing , we do grass mowing regularly and my wife asked you to remove that
large tree which is in front of the main door, which is there since beginning of the lease as it has
never been remov ed from the roots and it cause interfe ren ce to the entry into the house .
I think you didn't understa nd what my wife was referring to you that day. You are requeste d to
please arran ge to remove that growing tree from the roots permane ntly .
Also, in regard s to the lawn mowe r left by you at the premises, we have never used that mower as it
has got a very short electric al lead and it doesn't reach the lawn even at short distanc es. As told to
you before also, you can take back your lawn mowe r as it has never been used and not neede d.
6. Also, as discusse d in my last letter too, there are certain minor repair s (like toilet tissue hange r,
window scree ns etc), that are requir ed to be done in order to have the premise s in reason able state
of repair . You are reque ste d to arran ge to get those repairs done at the earliest.
Concluding above , We request you to please get the points no 2, 3, 4 & 5 in 2 week s time,
otherw ise we have no option other than to seek order from the ACT Renta l Tribun al for the same.
You can conta ct me if want to discuss anything to resolve the issues amicably .
Hopin g that you will respo nd positively to our reque sts.
10. the tenant annexed a series of photographs showing:
(a) bedding and furniture in a shed and outside a shed
(b) paling falling off a fence
11. On 11 July 2008 the lessor filed a further reply to the tenants response which read:
" AustLII Austl In response to the submissions by the aforementioned case, I would like to respond to some new
ancillary issues which were raised which we have not had the opportunity to address in our previous
submission.
On the matter of the full garage, at the beginning of the first tenancy in 2006 the landlord's agents
offered to remove the chairs and the wardrobe in the garage (which was originally in the house).
This was in addition to a sofa which was removed. However the tenants specifically did not want
these chairs or the wardrobe removed -claiming at the time they could use the chairs outdoors and
they could use the wardrobe. In 2006 during their first tenancy, the agents organised for a person to
come with a trailer to remove any items they did not want.
tLIIAustLIJ
We are therefore surprised at their recent claim of removing any garbage from the garage when this
is the first time we have heard of this since their letter only references a mattress in the garden
which they did not have removed when given the opportunity.
Though the tenants have claimed they "did not want to create any issue" as a reason for not
bringing this up earlier, from our experience the tenants have not been shy about asserting their
demands such as those detailed in previous submissions [ The tenants were even able to extract a rent
reduction for the first two weeks of the second lease by delaying a rent increase on the second lease
(which is clear on the lease document) before the lease was even finalised, however we do not consider
this last issue itself to be material to the current dispute.].
In addition we have never before heard of or seen the two mattresses which are pictured in the
photos nor have we seen other items in the garage such as the silver tubes. Nor have we been aware AUSEL !!
of the damage to the fence or missing palings before.
We would like to highlight that among the many photographs included by the tenant, the damage to ASELII
the rear door has not been photographed, though the appearance and nature of damage this is a key
matter which we have raised.
In relation to the plumbing repairs over Easter, clause 59 of the proscribed terms requires the tenant
to inform the lessor of any urgent repairs and requires the Lessor to organise them. The tenant
informed us by SMS at first instance that he had already booked a plumber. I believed this was
improper, since there was no impediment to phoning us first at either our home or mobile phone
which would have been less haphazard and more effective than SMS at the first instance. I
informed him of these points by phone and then afterwards again by SMS [This sequence of events
did not delay the repairs. Since the repairs were still scheduled from the first phone call by the tenant
and the plumber arrived more than 90 minutes later].
The tenant has claimed that the current dispute arises from our visit in the first week of January.
The original agents -Andrew Yan & Ling Ling Cao - were returning from the Fyshwick markets
when they found the tenants in the front yard contrary to their original claim that they would be
away from the house. They did not make any offer to allow the agents to visit as they claimed. They
had previously been unwilling to discuss the matter of the outstanding water bill over the phone. The
agents spoke to the tenants from the rolled down window of their car when they saw them and did not
leave the car at any stage. This sequence of event was re-iterated to the tenants in a letter dated 10th of
January 2008. This sequence of actual events has not been disputed by the tenants although they have
tl. AustLll AustLII AustL
characterised the nature of the visit differently and have made inferences about the intentions of the
agents.
However, with regard to the actual issues in dispute which we have made the application on, our view
has not changed from our previous submission:
• The tenant is illegally subletting the property and his brother is not on the lease as he claims.
• The tenant is liable to pay consumption related amounts for water for the reasons detailed previously
has failed to pay these amounts on multiple occasions and has even to failed to pay amounts which are
uncontested by the tenant.
• The tenant has caused or allowed the backdoor to be damaged and is liable for said damage for the
reasons detailed in the last submission. The door has not been left in a state of unreasonable disrepair by
the Lessor.
Attached is a letter originally sent to the tenant dated 23rd January 2008 in response to the letter the tenant
included dated the 21st of January 2008.
(letter of 23 January from lessor to the tenants)
In response to your letter dated, 21st of January 2008,1 would like to re-iterate the statements in our
previous letter, that is, the damage to the door is your responsibility and we require it to be fixed.
The door shows sign of twisting and severe force which makes the door un-attachable to the frame
whereas you have previously claimed that the problem related to loose screws.
tLIIAustLIJ
The landlord is not responsible for such damage where it is deliberate or negligent irrespective of
whether or not it relates to the securing the premises, we re-iterate that notwithstanding this you
also neglected your duty to mitigate damage as required by the residential tenancies act.
Under Clause 63(a) of the agreement - during the tenancy, the tenant must not intentionally or
negligently damage the premises or permit such damage. As such you are liable for this damage.
We also note that payment for the last water bill from November was only received on 16th of
January 2008, after our last letter.
In regard to the claim of an overcharged water bill; although clause 42(a) of the agreement states
the landlord is responsible for rates and taxes, this does not describe the water charges which you
mention. Water abstraction and network tax - are charged on a pro-rata basis, if you review the last
.ustLII AustLI AustLI
bill we sent you, you will find that the cost is charged at 77kL x $0.55 (for abstraction) and 77kL x
$0.09 (for water network). These fees are not related to the premises (like land tax or supply
charges) but to metered water consumption which is the responsibility of the tenant.
Clause 42(c) of the agreement states that the lessor is responsible for services where there is not an -
accurate metering device, but this consumption is metered and charged according to actual usage
and therefore not the responsibility of the landlord. I have paid the water supply and sewerage
charges which are the responsibility of the landlord. We remind you that we have previously
supplied statements to you.
Moreover under clause 46 of the agreement: The tenant is responsible for all charges associated
with the consumption of services supplied to the premises, including electricity, gas, water and -
telephone. These pro-rata fees are your responsibility and you have not been overcharged. These
fees are measures which the A.C.T. government has taken to reduce water consumption by the end
user.
We will not be removing the tree, this is part of the property and is an entirely unreasonable request.
We do not consider your objection to the length of the mowers cord valid, it could have been easily
fixed with an extension cord. Though we do not consider this issue to be of any consequence.
As we stated in our last letter repairs as minor as the toilet paper hanger to be of a routine nature. Clause
55(3) of the agreement does not require the notification of the land lord for anything that an ordinary
tenant would reasonably be expected to do, for example, changing a light globe or a fuse. We consider
that the toilet tissue paper hanger in the laundry to fall within this category.
Once again we are concerned that our requests to rectify the situation have been met with evasion and
requests for new repairs. As I have described above I consider most of these requests disingenuous and a
delaying tactic and retaliatory to avoid responsibility. We note for example that your statement regarding
the security aspects of the broken door are new and different to your original claim of the need for
ventilation.
I have been most offended by the rudeness you have exhibited to my wife over the phone in suddenly
failing to recognise her right to act in spite of our previous history indicating otherwise and the failure to
recognise our requests coupled with your repeated evasion which I have detailed in this and my previous
letter.
We do not wish to continue the lease, we believe the best means of resolving this amicably is for us to
assist you in finding alternate property by providing a reference and offering a flexible period to vacate.
I am exercising our term in our signed contract to provide at least two weeks notice to end the lease by
either party - at point 11, however we are willing to provide 3 weeks. In the alternative I am also
exercising our right to end the lease based on your failure to rectify the damage to the back door despite
notice.
However as I mention I am willing to assist you by negotiating on the time needed by yourself to find
tLIIAustLIJ other property if you require it to prevent unnecessary hardship. Unless we hear from you to extend this
period please consider this 3 weeks notice. We believe this is more than fair, however please contact us
quickly if you wish to extend this time.
Please note that we will require the property to be available for viewing by prospective tenants in the final
weeks as per the Residential Tenancies Act1 , we will arrange suitable times with yourself as that period
approaches.
Before the release of your bond we expect that the rent to paid up and the screen door and any other
damage to be fixed and restored and the property to be left clean including a vacuum of the house.
However we will not ask you to dispose of the mattress propped against the side of the garage at the
property if this is a matter of contention.
Once the property is restored to our satisfaction then we will release your bond and further assist you by
providing a reference to assist you in finding a new property.
12. At the hearing on 15 July 2008 Mr Jason Yan appeared for the lessor and Mr AustLI Aust!Il AustLI AustLi
Sumit Anand appeared for the tenant. Mr Yan tendered a General Power of
Attorney from Mr Cao in this favour. Mr Anand tendered a letter of authority
from the lessor to act on his behalf.
13. After hearing the parties the Tribunal issued an order for termination of the
tenancy on 10 August 2008 and adjourned the balance of the claim for monies
allegedly owing until 15 August 2008. the Tribunal made the following procedural
orders:
…
9 That the matter is adjourned for further hearing on Friday the 15th of August, 2008 at 10.00am.
10. That the Lessor is to file and serve a copy of all water accounts since the commencement of the lease by
the 22nd of July, 2008.
11. That the Lessor is to tabulate the consumption charges, extractions and connection charges for each water
account and total all accounts.
12 That the Lessor is to advise the amount of payments made by the Tenant for water to date.
-. ActLll istLI AustLII AustLI
13. That the Tenant is to file and serve by the 29th of July, 2008 his reply, indicating the amount paid by the
Tenant to date for water.
14. That the issue of the extraction charges remains to be determined.
14. On 23 July 2008 the lessor filed the following tabulation of the water bills which
were the same three water bills filed with the original application:
In compliance with orders 10,11 & 12 of the residential tenancies tribunal the following are
tabulated amounts for the quarterly consumption related fees: The supply fees, abstraction fee,
network tax and consumption fee for the current lease for 61 Matina street, Narrabundah from the
beginning of the Lease in August 2007.
Attached are the bills for the first 3 quarters of the year long lease, the bill for the final quarter has
not yet been issued.
Consumption charges
Period Bill Due Abstraction Network tax Cons um pti on Total Paid by tenant
08/2007 - 13-Dec-O/ 42.35 6.93 102.64 151.92 151.92
11/2008
11/2007- x-^ 7-Mar-08 39.6 6.48 120.24 166.32 0
tLIIAustLI 02/2008
02/2008 - X 42.35 6.93 128.59 177.87 0
05/2008 6-Jun-08
Total 124.3 20.34 351.47 496.11 151.92
Amount outstanding $ 344.19
Supply charges (no supply charges have been invoiced to the tenant)
Supply period Bill Due Sewerage Water supply Sewer network tax total
supply
10/2007- 13-Dec-07 103.44 18.75 4.5 126.69
12/2007
1/2008 - 7-Mar-08 103.44 18.75 4.5 126.69
03/2008
04/2008 - 6-Jun-08 103.44 18.75 4.5 126.69
06/2008
Total 310.32 56.25 13.5 380.07
15. The tenant responded by letter of 24 July 2008 asking for copies of all water bills
since August 2006 which the tenant claimed was the commencement of the lease.
16. On 13 Augsut 2008 the landlord filed a tabulation of the water bills for what is
described as “the previous lease” of the premises. Copies of the actual water bills
were annexed:
The supply fees, abstraction fee, network tax and consumption fee for the previous lease for 61
Matina street, Narrabundah starting in August 2006.
Attached are the bills.
Consumption charges
istLll AustLII AustLli
Period Abstraction Water Consumptio Total Paid by
network tax tenant
n
08/2006 -11/2006 23.65 0 34.69 58.34 58.34
11/2006-02/2007 17.6 0 41.28 58.88 58.88
02/2007 - 5/2007 37.95 0 37.95 75.9 75.9
05/2007 - 8/2007 39.05 3.15 50.89 93.09 93.09
Total 118.25 3.15 164.81 286.21 :>86.:>1
Supply charges (no supply charges have been invoiced to the tenant)
Date Water Sewerage Sewerage Total Paid by Paid by
supply supply network tax tenant landlord
9/2006- 18.75 99.7 0 118.45 0 118.45
12/2006
12/2006- 18.75 99.7 0 118.45 0 ^ 118.45
3/2007
3/2007 - 18.75 99.7 0 118.45 0 118.45
6/2007
6/2007-9/2007 18.75 103.44 4.5 126.69 0 126.69
Total 75 402.54 4.5 482.04 0 482.04
17. The landlord tabulated the total charges for the period of present tenancy as
tLIIAustLI follows:
Abstraction Network Consumption Total
Fee fee
Total including final metre 254.1 25.38 578.67 858.15
Paid 160.6 10.08 267.45 438.13
—
Owing 93.5 15.3 311.22 420.02
18. The landlord filed a copy of the Independent Competition and Regulatory
Commission (ICRC) (Water Abstraction Charge) Revocation 2008 (No1)
Declaration which commenced on 1 July 2008 and which read:
ustLII AustLI AustLI
Independent Competition and Regulatory Commission (Water Abstraction Charge) Revocation
2008 (No 1)
Disallowable instrument DI2008—119
made under the Independent Competition and Regulatory Commission Act 1997, section 4C
(Declared fees to be passed on to consumers)
EXPLANATORY STATEMENT_
The Water Abstraction Charge (WAC) is a statutory fee payable by the holder of a licence to take
water, determine d under the Water Resourc es Act 2007.
Previous price determinations by the Independe nt Competition and Regulatory Commission (ICRC) in
relation to water services did not take into account the WAC paid by the licence holder. Instead, the
Indepe ndent Competition and Regulatory Commission (Water Abstraction Charge) Declaration 2003 (No
1) Dl 2003-332 declared the WAC to be a statutory fee affecting the cost of providing water services that
may be passed on in full to consum ers of the service.
In April 2008 the ICRC Final Report for the water and wastewater price review determined that the WAC
is a standard business cost. As such the WAC has been taken into account by the ICRC in the price
direction for the provision of water services to operate from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2013.
AustLII AustLI
As a consequence, the Independent Competition and Regulatory Commission (Water Abstraction
Charge) Declaration 2003 (No 1) Dl 2003-332 is revoked from the date of comm enc em e nt of the
price direction .
19. The landlord filed a copy of the ICRC (Utilities (Network Facilities Tax)
Declaration 2006 (No1) which commenced on 1 January 2007 and ceased effect
on 30 June 2008, which read:
Independent Competition and Regulatory Commission (Utilities (Network Facilities Tax)) Declaration
2006 (No 1)
Disallowable instrument DI2006—272 made under the Independent Competition and Regulatory
Commission Act 1997, s4C(l)(a) (Declared fees to be passed on to consumers)
EXPLANATORY STATEMENT
The Utilities (Network Facilities Tax) Act 2006 imposes a tax on a network facility on land in the ACT.
The rate of tax is determined by the Treasurer under section 139 of the Taxation Administration Act
1999.
A network facility is any part of the infrastructure of a utility network not fixed to land subject to a
lease, a license granted by the Territory or any right prescribed by regulation.
Utility networks include networks for transmitting and distributing electricity, gas, sewerage, water and
tLIIAustLIJ telecommunications.
Examples of a network facility include powerlines or pipes over or under land, and telecommunications
cabling.
This Declaration is made under section 4C(l)(a) of the Independent Competition and Regulatory
Commission Act 1997, which provides that a statutory fee that affects the cost of providing a utility
service may be passed on in full to consumers of the service.
This Declaration provides that the statutory fee affecting the cost of utility services under the Utilities
(Network Facilities Tax) Act 2006, the rate of which is determined by the Treasurer under section 139
of the Taxation Administration Act 1999, may be passed on in full to consumers by owners of network
facilities.
AustLII AustLII AustLI
20. On 15 August Mr Yan appeared for the lessor and the tenant appeared in person.
The lessor sought to amend his claim to include a claim for cleaning and repairs
following the termination of the tenancy. The matter was further adjourned to 29
September 2008 with the following procedural orders:
Upon hearing Phillip Cao the Applicant, and Vaneet Grover the Respondent, the Tribunal made the
following ORDERS:
1. That the application is adjourned until Monday the 29th day of September, 2008, at 2.00pm.
2. That the parties are to file and serve further submissions on the law relating to the abstraction charge
and network fee within 7 days.
3. That the application is amended to include a claim for cleaning and repairs by the Lessor.
4. That the Lessor is to file and serve within 14 days of the claim made together with
(a) relevant reports
(b) photos
(c) invoices
(d) condition reports
5. That the Tenant is to file and serve within further 14 days its response to the claim together with any
quotes, photos or other evidence.
21. On 22 August 2008 the lessor filed the following submissions:
6. Liability of the water abstraction fee and the network fee (the fees)
In addition to paragraph 5.4 of the originating application on this matter, The Lessor makes the
following additional submissions:
6.1. he lessor has paid all supply charges and has not invoiced the tenant for these.
6.2. Clause 46 of the standard residential tenancy terms imposes liability on the tenant for the
abstraction and network fees stating that:
"The tenant is responsible for all charges associated with the consumption of services
supplied to the premises, including electricity, gas, water and telephone, "
The broad obligation imposed on the tenant by the language of this clause is in contrast to the narrow
obligations imposed on the lessor by clause 42 of the standard terms:
42 The lessor is responsible for the cost of the following:
(a) rates and taxes relating to the premises:
tLIIAustLII (b) services for which the lessor agrees to be responsible;
(c) services for which there is not a separate metering device so that amounts consumed
during the period of the tenancy cannot be accurately decided;
6.3. Clause 42(a) is addressed in paragraph 5.4 of the previous submissions mentioned earlier.
6.4. Clause 42(b) does not apply to the lessor in this situation since clause 10 of the signed lease
agreement states that the tenant is liable for water bills.
6.5. Clause 42(c) does not apply to the lessor in this situation since there is a water metering
device which is reflected in the water bills.
6.6. The disallowable regulation enabling the water abstraction fee1 has since been revoked from
the date of commencement of the original regulation [Commissioner for ACT Revenue v Kithock Pty AUSEL !!
Ltd (2001) 181 ALR 609]. The explanatory statement of the revoking regulation indicates that the
abstraction fee has actually been "a standard business cost" all along. In addition to the reasons
mentioned in paragraph 5.4, for this reason it is part of the consumption price structure. ASELII
6.7. The disallowable regulation for both the abstraction fee and water network fee state that it is to
be passed onto the end consumer. Since the fees are charged per kilolitre of water consumption -
the end consumer is the tenant.
6.8. The disallowable regulation enabling the water network fee expired on the 30£ June 2008.
6.9. In the alternative if the network fee is a tax then it is not a tax when passed on by
ACTEWAGL. The fee is imposed on consumers after being passed on by ACTEWAGL. It is
billed by ACTEWAGL on statements as "Recovery ACT Govt utilities water network tax" and can
be viewed on previously submitted bills. This recovery arrangement means that it is not a tax in the
hands of the consumer, since it is levied on the utility as owners of water network facilities, and
then passed onto subsequent consumers with the recovery charge.[Independent Competition and
Regulatory Commission (Water Abstraction Charge) Declaration 2003 (No 1) DT 2003-332
Explanatory note; Harper v Minister for Sea Fisheries (1989) 168 CLR 314] Taxes passed on in this
manner are not taxes in the hands of the final consumer.4 They are therefore part of the cost
structure of water consumption and part of the fee for service which makes this the liability of the
tenant.
th Austell AustLII AustL
-. A.IctLll istLI AustLII AustLI
6.10. Similarly the abstraction charge is also a fee imposed on the utility for catchment
management services and the associated environmental burden (in the explanatory note) which is
then subsequently passed onto end consumers by regulation and therefore the liability of the tenant.
6.11. In the alternative the water abstraction fee is not a tax at all because it is a pro-rata charge for
water as a scarce natural resource.5 This makes it a fee for the consumption of a resource.
6.12. In the alternative both fees are an excise imposed by a body other than the Federal
government, therefore the laws were invalidly enacted [Section 90 Commonwealth Constitution.]
22. On 29 August 2008 the landlord filed further written submissions which read:
Outstanding fees and damage to 61 Matina Street, Narrabundah during the tenancy of Vaneet
Grover
1. The following is a summary of the repairs and outstanding fees, that we have subsequently
discovered on the tenants vacating the premises:
1.1. The dead lock installed by the tenant (which we do not have keys for) without lessor consent
on the backdoor is broken. The lock on the letterbox also does not work with any keys we have or
returned to us -Replacement of locks by a locksmith: $285.00
1 2. Outstanding rent for the 8th and 9th of August 2008 at $48.57/day (previously set by the tribunal
tLIIAustLIJ in the last order): $97.14
a) Clause 7 of the lease states that rent is paid on a Friday, the tenants moved out on Sunday
morning - the rent is for the Friday and Saturday following from the last rent payment.
b) The last rent payment was for only $1 360.00 - for 28 days exactly.
1 3. Outstanding water bills previously notified: $344.10
1.4. Final water bill from meter reading: $75.83
1.5. Steam clean for dirty carpets, which the tenant accepted responsibility for on the 10th of August
2008 during our meeting. $162.00
1.6. Holes in the wall including between the living room and bedroom & painting over damage
(quotation): $400 - $450 AUSEL !!
1.7. Repair of damaged back security door & hole carved in the bedroom door: $303.80
1.8. Refit of kitchen cabinet door which is damaged and now can not be closed (quotation): ASELII
$429.00
1.9. Bedroom flyscreen, Kitchen flyscreen & front door flyscreen - each have substantial holes:
Quote to be delivered at a later date.
1.10. Missing fence palings: Quote to be delivered at a later date.
1.11. Total (so far): $2146.87
2. Although the tenant did not clean the house despite our written notice to do so (see attached photos),
we have forgone the cost of general cleaning from the bill which we have carried out by ourselves (not
including the steam cleaning which was been agreed to by the tenant).
3. We are also not claiming the replacement of the backdoor despite the damage caused by the bad
installation of the lock - only the cost of replacing the badly installed and broken lock which could not be
opened from the inside.
4. Although the evaluation of damage may have tax depreciation consequences for the asset being
replaced -for our requested repairs in paragraph 1, we have generally not sought new for old
replacement but rather repairs to bring the fixture to a good usable state had the damage not occurred.
5. Clause 64 of the standard terms also requires the tenant leave the premises "in substantially the same
condition asthe premises were in at the commencement of the Tenancy Agreement". Any consideration
of depreciation should also not contravene this explicit proscribed term as part of the 1997 Residential
Tenancies Act.
6. Most of the repaired items we have requested are also items more commonly part of the house and not
commonly depreciated due to wear and tear.
7. The hole in the wall and the hole carved in the door in paragraphs 1.6 & 1.7-doors and walls are part
of the house and usually do not require repair or replacement in the manner done so due to normal wear
and tear nor are they normally depreciated.
8. For example the damage to the back security door in paragraph 1.7, was repaired not replaced. This
door was delivered in good working condition in mid 2006 (this assertion has not been disputed). The
steel bottom hinge was heavily twisted and ripped off it's hinges. See Picture E.
9. This damage correlates a pattern of undue damage we have discovered throughout the house on the
inside.
tLIIAustLIJ 10. We are requesting payment of the entirety of the amounts outstanding having already considered the
write downs involved and the nature of the repairs in restoring the damaged items to a usable state given
the damage sustained.
11. Currently this amounts to $2146.87. We are requesting the bond ($1360.00) and the additional
shortfall of $786.87, noting that this includes amounts of unpaid rent, water bills, and carpet cleaning;
and not just property damage.
12. Attached are the relevant receipts and quotes with the exception of the water bill from paragraph 3
which we have previously supplied the receipts for.
23. The landlord’s submissions annexed a range of photographs taken after the end of
the tenancy showing:
(a) the front door and the back door hinge
(b) a hole carved in the bedroom door Must !!! Aust !!! AustLI AustLi
(c) the kitchen
(d) the back door showing a deadlock
(e) a bedroom wall showing a hole drilled through it
(f) a series of 28 further photographs showing various aspects of the premises
before and after the tenancy
(g) an invoice for new locks in the sum of $285.00
(h) an invoice from Morgan’s Group for carpet cleaning in the sum of $162.00
(i) an invoice from Weber M&B in the sum of $303.80 for the supply and
fitting of two doors and a security door.
(j) an ACTEWAGL statement for water for the period 1 July 2008-30
September 2008 showing consumption of $62.39; sewer supply charge of
$110.95; water supply charge of $21.25; water net work tax of $1.89;
water abstraction charge of $11.55.
24. The tenant filed submissions on 10 September 2008 which read:
This is in reference to the notice reference no RT489 of 2008 issued to us on 28th August
2008.
In regards to the Charges on Water Network Tax & Abstraction Charges, pi find attached info as
Annexure-I, which clearly states that tenant only pays Water Consumption Charges & other
charges have to be paid by landlord. But, in our case, our landlord has overcharged us by
charging these taxes, which are never meant to be paid by us.
I would like to advice you that we don't take any responsibility of the damages mentioned
by our landlord as mentioned in points 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9 & 1.10 on his letter. We have returned
the house in the same condition in which house was given to us in August 2006. We are
attaching the photographs taken by us at the time of vacating the house as Annexure-II.
In last 2 years no money was spent at all on renovating the house and now our landlord is totally
lying and wants to renovate his property at our cost. If he thinks that place was damaged by
us then he should have told us at the time when we returned the house keys. We were not shown
any damage and no picture was taken in our presence.
We have stayed at that place for 2 years and if our landlord had a doubt that we are
damaging the property then why didn't he take any initiative to inspect the property. I would
like to pay your attention that landlord never inspected the house during our 2 years of
tenancy at his place.
tLIIAustLIJ In fact, he visited the house only at our many requests when we asked him to get the fly screen
door fixed. He never considered his responsibility to look at other things in terms of inspection.
This can be seen from the condition of the fence which was visible even when one passes
through. But he never bothered to look into the things.
We do take the responsibility of getting the carpets steam cleaned and we agreed to that with
the landlord that they can get it done and we will pay the bill. At the time of handover of
keys on 10th august our landlord didn't object to anything or had any problem in the
condition house was returned.
When we rented the house in August 2006, it was not provided to us in the vacant condition.
He always kept on making false promises that he will get his stuff removed which was never
done till the end of lease. In fact, we request Tribunal to advise our landlord to compensate us
for not giving us the premises in vacant condition.
Also, our landlady has harassed us by making phone calls to our office during day time by
threatening us to vacate the house and also she has called many times during the night time at MustLll JustLI AustLI AustLi
home threatening the same. This clearly shows how far these guys can go in order to get their
false motives served.
In view of above, I request you to please consider us and give fair justice to the case.
25. The tenant annexed a series of 12 pages of photographs.
26. On 29 September 2008 Mr Yan appeared for the lessor and the tenant appeared in
person. The Applicant tendered a revised list of the claims made:
Revised quotation
P a r a g ra p h D e s c r ip t i o n Amount Notes
1. 1 Lock replacement $285. 00 N o t d is p u t e d
1.2 O ut s t an d i ng r en t $97. 14 S et b y t r ib u n al o n
1.3 Outstanding water bills $344. 10
1.4 F i na l w a te r b i ll $75.83
ustLll AustLIL A
1.5 St e am cl e an f or di r ty ca r pe t s $162.00 N o t d is p u t e d
1.6 H o le i n th e w a ll $200. 00 P a in t i n g n o t b ei n g
1.7 Repair back security door & bedroom door $303. 80
1.8 D a m a g e o f k i t c h e n c a b i n e t $250. 00 Alternate tradesmen
quote
1.9 F l ys c r e e n $22.91
1. 10 F e n c e p a l i n g $0.00 Approx. 2. 50 ea ch :
T o ta l $1,740.78
27. The above revised claim by the lessor did not include many issues raised in the
above correspondence and submissions. The Tribunal informed the Lessor that it
only intended to address the claims actually made and if the revised claim
tLILAustLII AustLII AustLh accurately reflected the Lessor’s claim then this is all that would be addressed.
The lessor had ample opportunity to put in issue everything he chose to. In fact
most of the lessor’s claims relating to the alleged damage to the property were
only raised for the first time by the lessor in his submissions of 29 August 2008.
Notwithstanding the lateness of these claims the Tribunal still permitted them to
be pressed.
28. The tenant maintained his counter claim for:
(a) the lessor’s alleged failure to fix the back door and fence
(b) the lessors failure to deliver vacant possession in that the lessor’s
possession occupied half of the two car garage.
29. The tenant also raised as range of matters going beyond the scope of the above
counter claim. The Tribunal informed the tenant that it would only consider those
claims the tenant had made. The tenant also had ample opportunity to put in issue
everything he chose to.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
30. The Tribunal took the parties through each of the revised claims and allowed them
to summarise the evidence and submissions on the law, that they wished to put.
31. The tenant admitted responsibility for the rent of $97.14 (item 1.2); the carpet
cleaning of $162.00 (item 1.5); and damage to the kitchen cabinet of $250.00
(item 1.8). The lessor dropped the claim for the fence (item 1.10).
32. The tenant denied liability for the locks (item 1.1); the hole in the wall (item 1.6);
the damage to the back security door and bedroom door (item 1.7); and the
damage to the flyscreen (item 1.9).
33. The tenant admitted the water consumption charges in the sum of $311.22 but
denied responsibility for the abstraction charges ($93.50) and the net work taxes
($15.3) which the tenant contended were lessor costs.
34. The lessor resisted the counter claim on the bases that:
(a) at not time was the lessor on notice of the need to fix the back door or
fence
(b) the tenant consented to the lessor leaving his goods in the garage and the
lessor would have removed them had the tenant so requested.
35. At the end of the hearing the Tribunal informed the parties that the matter would
be reserved for a written decision on the lessor’s claim and the tenant’s counter
claim.
Findings of fact:
36. The Tribunal is satisfied that the tenant’s admissions of liability at paragraphs 31
and 33 were correctly made and finds for the lessor in the sum of $820.14.
37. The remaining issues are those items of the lessor’s claim denied by the tenant at
paragraph 32 above; the issue of responsibility for the water abstraction charges
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! and network taxes, and the tenant’s counter claim per paragraph 28 above.
The locks
38. The claim by the Lessor for the dead locks was raised for the first time in the
submissions of 29 August 2008. The Lessor asserted that the tenant had replaced
the dead locks without consent and did a poor job. The photographs revealed what
appeared to be a poor job at affixing deadlocks which would need to be redone.
Apart from a simple denial of the claim the tenant did not address the issue of
whether he had in fact replaced the deadlock or not. In these circumstances the
Tribunal accepts the Lessor’s evidence and quotations for rectification in the sum
of $285.00.
The hole in the wall
39. The hole is between the living room and bedroom. The photographs show a large
drilled circular hole. Again the tenant did not enter into anything other than a
general denial. It was not asserted by the tenant that the hole was there at the start Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
of the tenancy. In these circumstances the Tribunal is satisfied that the tenant, or
someone upon the premises with the tenant’s consent, drilled the hole. The
Tribunal allows $200.00 in rectification costs.
The bedroom door
40. The photographs showed a sizeable drilled hole through the bedroom door. Again
the tenant did not enter into anything other than a general denial. It was not
asserted by the tenant that the hole was there at the start of the tenancy. In these
circumstances the Tribunal is satisfied that the tenant, or someone upon the
premises with the tenant’s consent, drilled the hole.
The back security door
41. This item features in both the lessor’s claim against the tenant and in the tenant’s
counter claim against the lessor. The outcome depends on how the door came to
be damaged. If the tenant damaged it then he is responsible for replacing it. If the
tenant did not damage it then the lessor is liable for having failed to repair it
during the tenancy.
42. The photographs of the door tend to support the lessor’s contentions that it had
been forcible removed from the hinges. Of itself this does not mean that the door
was not already in disrepair as alleged by the tenant. The tenant has consistently
maintained that the hinges to the door had come away from the door jam and had
requested repair. The Tribunal accepts the tenant’s evidence that the lessor
actually attended and attempted to refix the hinges to door jam without success.
Nevertheless the fact that the screen door needed repair is not a ground for
forcefully ripping it from its hinges as appears to have been done.
43. The Tribunal is satisfied that the tenant, or someone upon the premises with the
tenant’s consent, has ripped the door from its hinges. The Tribunal allows the
rectification cost of the screen door and bedroom door at $303.80.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
The flyscreen
44. The photographs of the flyscreen shows ageing without evidence suggestive of a
tear or other malicious damage. The lessor did not advance any thesis about the
cause of the damage consistent with the tenant’s intentional or negligent actions
and the Tribunal is satisfied that the damage is just ageing.
The lessors partial occupation of the garage
45. There is no dispute between the parties that the lessor had personal property in the
back yard and garage. The photographs confirm this. The issue is whether the
tenant consented to the presence of the property or not. In his letter of 21 Jan 08 to
the lessor the tenant affirmed his position that he wanted the lessor to remove the
property. Even then the lessor did not remove the property. What ever might have
been the lessor’s understanding on the issue prior to this date, the lessor could
have had no doubt after 21 January 2008 but still did nothing to remove the
property. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
46. The Tribunal accepts the tenant’s contention that he neither wanted the lessor’s
property in the garage and did not consent to its presence. Accordingly the lessor
is in breach of his duty to deliver vacant possession at the commencement of the
tenancy.
47. The Tribunal allows compensation to the tenant calculated as the equivalent of a
rent reduction of $20pw over the terms of the tenancy for the loss of use of half
the garage and the inconvenience caused. The tenancy commenced on 16 August
and was terminated on 10 August 2008, being 51 weeks @ $20 pw = $1020.00.
The water abstraction charge and the water net work taxes
48. The claim made by the lessor for the unpaid abstraction charge amounts to $93.50
and for the unpaid water net work tax amounts to $15.30 per paragraph 17 above.
According to the lessor’s tabulation at paragraph 17 above, the tenant have in fact
paid $160.60 in previously abstraction charges and $10.08 in previous network
facilities taxes.
49. The relevant contractual and statutory provisions regulating the issue of the
abstraction charge and net work tax as between the lessor and the tenant are
prescribed terms 42-46 of the Residential Tenancies Act 1997:
42 The lessor is responsible for the cost of the following:
(a) rates and taxes relating to the premises;
(b) services for which the lessor agrees to be responsible;
(c) services for which there is not a separate metering device so that amounts consumed during
the period of the tenancy cannot be accurately decided;
(d) all services up to the time of measurement or reading at the beginning of the tenancy;
(e) all services after reading or measurement at the end of the tenancy providing the tenant has
not made any use of the service after the reading.
43(1) The lessor must pay for any physical installation of services (eg water, electricity, gas,
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! telephone line).
(2) The tenant is responsible for the connection of all services that will be supplied in the
tenant's name.
44 The lessor must pay the annual supply charge associated with the supply of water or
sewerage.
46 The tenant is responsible for all charges associated with the consumption of services
supplied to the premises, including electricity, gas, water and telephone.
50. Before turning to the above prescribed terms it is necessary to look at the statutory
background in which the abstraction charges and network taxes arise. Sections 29
and 107 Water Resources Act 2007 provide for the grant of a license to “take”
water from water resources in the ACT and for the levying of a “fee” for the
license. But section 11(2) provides that:
(2) However, a person does not take water if the person uses water taken by someone else
under a license to take water.
Example—s (2)
using water provided by a water utility
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
51. It is sufficiently clear that ActewAGL is required to possess a license to take water
for commercial supply and may thereby be subject to a license fee under the
Water Resources Act 2007. But it does not appear to the Tribunal that the owner
or tenant of a suburban house who contracts with ActewAGL for the supply of
water is “taking” water within the meaning of section 29 and 107 and is thereby
directly liable for a fee imposed under section 107.
52. Section 4C ICRC Act 1997 provides:
(1) The Minister may declare in writing, that-
(a) a statutory fee affects the cost of providing a utility service and may be passed on in full to
the consumer of the service: or
(b) a fee for a regulated service is to be passed on in full to the consumer of the service.
53. For present purposes nothing appears to turn on whether section 4C(1)(a) or (b) is
apposite to the water supplied by ActewAGL. The statutory fee referred to in
section 4C(1)(a) or (b)is presumably the fee payable by ActewAGL under the
Water Resources Act 2007 and the Minister’s declaration pursuant to section 4C
permits ActewAGL to pass on this statutory fee in full to the “consumer”.
54. This then raises the issue of who is the “consumer” for the purposes of section 4C
for which there is no definition in the ICRC Act. The contractual relations
between ActewAGL and the consumer of its water services is determined by the
Utilities Act 2000. For suburban premises the water is supplied under a standard
customer contract (Part 6 Div 6.2).
55. Section 84 Utilities Act 2000 defines who may apply for a water supply under a
standard customer contract and includes both the owner and the tenant of a
property:
84(1) A water supplier must, on application by a person, and in accordance with the supplier's
standard customer contract, supply water to premises owned or occupied by the person.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi 56. Section 92 then provides that the standard customer contract forms “an
enforceable contract” between ActewAGL and the owner or occupier who applied
for the water service. The terms of the contract are fixed by a process outlined in
the Utilities Act 2000 and are the same for all customers.
57. A “customer” is defined in section 17 Utilities Act 2000 to include “a person for
whom the service is provided” as well as the person who made the application for
the service. Thus the standard customer contract can apply to a tenant living in the
premises and using water even if that tenant did not personally apply to
ActewAGL for the supply. Prima facie, this appears to be inconsistent with
section 92 which only deems the binding contract between ActewAGL and the
person who actually applied for the water service. Thus if a lessor applied for the
water service albeit that the water was supplied for the benefit of a tenant, then the
binding contract is with the lessor only but the tenant has the status of a
“customer”.
58. Section 94(1) Utilities Act 2000 governs who must pay provides that the “owner
of the land where water is supplied under a standard customer contract is liable for
Must!Il Aust!Il AustLI AustLi
the amount payable under the contract”.
59. Section 94(6) defines the “owner” of the property to which water is supplied:
(6) In this section “owner means:
(a) for land held in fee simple-the person in whom the fee simple is vested for the time being:
or
(b) for land held under a lease-the lessee for the time being; or
(c) for land occupied under a tenancy granted by the Territory-the tenant for the time being;
or
(d) for other land occupied by a person with the consent of the Territory-that person
60. On its face section 94(6)(b) governs cases where there is a “lease” in existence for
the property and imposes the duty to pay the abstraction charge on the lessee.
There is no definition of a “lease” in the Utilities Act 2000 nor in the Legislation
Act 2001 nor in any other legislation that is relevant for present purposes. This
means that the term “lease” must take its meaning at common law.
61. At common law the definition of a “lease” turns on the exclusive right of
possession to the premises (Radaich v. Smith (1959) 101 CLR 209; The Wik
Peoples v. Queensland (1996) 71 ALJR 173; Bruton v. London and Quadrant
Housing Trust 1999 3 AER 481). Although the definition of a “residential tenancy
agreement” in section 6A(3) Residential Tenancies Act 1997 expressly does not
require an exclusive right of possession, prescribed term 53 Residential Tenancies
Act 1997 expressly confers an exclusive right of occupancy on a tenant under a
residential tenancy agreement, and for that reason a residential tenancy agreement
is also a “lease” at common law (Estate of Tanya Humphries v. Commissioner for
Housing 2003 ACTSC 40; Cohen-Hallaleh v. Cyril Rosenbaum Synagogue [2003]
NSWSC 395).
62. It may be that the legislature did not intend the word “lease” as it appears in
section 94(6)(b) to include residential tenancy agreements. But the Leases (
Commercial and Retail) Act 2001 does use the term “lease” and hence presumably
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! section 94(6)(b) was intended to apply to commercial and retail leases. In this
event the tenants of commercial and retail lease would inherit the obligation under
section 94(6)(b) to pay the abstraction charge. Assuming this to be the case, it is
not immediately obvious to the Tribunal why the legislature would choose to
impose the duty to pay the abstraction charge on a small commercial and retail
tenants but not on a residential tenant.
63. There is an alternative interpretation to section 94(6)(b) which assumes that the
drafts person has omitted to include the word “Crown” before the word “lease”.
The superficial attraction of this approach is that it relieves tenants in general from
responsibility for the water abstraction charge, and putting para 94(6)(a) to one
side, it provides a form of coherency in that the remaining paragraphs of s94(6)
each deal with estates in land held from the Territory.
64. The problems with this approach are threefold:
(a) It does require an assumption that there has been a drafting error and the
reading into the statute of specific words: Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
(b) As section 94(6) currently stands there is a coherence in the sense the
“owner” is defined as being the party with the right to possession of the
property as opposed to the party holding the legal title to the property. In
the case of para (a) the party holding the fee simple has the right to
possession subject to any lease. Para (b) then provides that if a lease exists
pursuant to which the tenant takes the exclusive right to possession, then
the charge for the water abstraction attached to them. The use of the term
“lease” in para (b) is apt to catch both residential and commercial leases.
Paras (c) and (d) then deal with tenancies and occupation agreement
granted from the Territory which again confer on the tenant and the
occupant the right to possession of the property.
(c) If paragraph (b) is read as being limited to Crown leases only, then the
seemingly anomalous situation arises in that the Territory in its capacity as
a landlord is not responsible for the water abstraction charge, but a private
landlord is responsible for the charge. Conversely, a tenant of the Territory
is responsible for the charge but a tenant of a private landlord is not. It
does not seem likely that the legislature intended to introduce such a bias
into the market and to create horizontal inequity in this form.
65. The Tribunal understands that ActewAGL has a practice that all water accounts
must be in the name of the lessor and not the tenant. Be this as it may, there does
not appear to anything in the Utilities Act 2000 to support this practice. To the
contrary sections 17, 84, 92 and 94 lead to the conclusion that a tenant may apply
for the supply of water and may be a customer under a standard customer contract.
Not only does this appear to be the case but the effect of section 94 appears to
impose on the tenant the responsibility of paying all charges raised under the
standard customer contract.
66. The standard customer contract itself at clause 3.1 specifically envisages that a
tenant may be the party to the standard contract and clause 6.2 of the standard
contract imposes the obligation to pay the abstraction charge on the party to the
standard customer contract.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
67. The Tribunal finds it difficult to arrive at any consistent understanding of the
above statutory provisions. What is clear is that either a lessor or a tenant can
apply to ActewAGL for a water supply under a standard customer contract.
Whoever makes this application is then a party to the standard customer contract
and will thus inherit responsibility for all the charges lawfully levied for the water
supply, including the abstraction charge.
68. What is not clear is the identity of the “consumer” referred to in section 4C ICRC
Act and whether this consumer is synonymous with the customer who is the party
to the standard customer contract with ActewAGL. It is also not clear how this all
applies in the present circumstances where the lessor made the application for the
water supply and as such is the party to the standard customer contract albeit the
tenant has the status of a “customer” as well. In particular section 94 then raises
the spectre that the lessor is the party to the standard contract but the tenant has a
statutory obligation to pay for the charges under the standard contract.
69. There does not appear to be anything in the Utilities Act 2000 that expressly Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
permits the lessor to pass on this cost to the tenant as the ultimate “consumer”.
70. The state of the above legislative scheme is so unclear as to warrant the attention
of the Legislative Assembly to make clear to the community who is responsible
for what charges.
71. If a proper reading of the above legislative scheme produces the result that only
the lessor is the party to the standard contract, and is the only party directly
responsible to ActewAGL for the payment of the abstraction charge, then the
issue becomes which of prescribed terms 44 and 46 Residential Tenancies Act
1997 applies. If prescribed term 44 applies then the lessor is left with
responsibility for the abstraction charge. If prescribed term 46 applies then the
tenant is responsible for the abstraction charge.
72. If a proper reading of the above legislative scheme produces the result that the
tenant is directly responsible for the payment of the abstraction charge pursuant to
section 94 then it is not necessary to find any provision of the Residential
Tenancies Act 1997 which governs the imposition of liability or the right of the
landlord to recover the abstraction charge from the tenant. In fact, in this case it
seems that ActewAGL has no right to include the abstraction charge on the lessors
account in the first instance and lessor’s generally should may have paid the
charge to ActewAGL under both a mistake of fact and law that would permit
lessor’s generally to recover the charges paid from ActewAGL. This just further
highlights the need for legislative reform on the point.
73. Whilst the matter is far from clear, the Tribunal favours the approach most
consistent with the common law of contract, namely that the party who applied to
ActewAGL for the water service to the premises is the only true party to the
standard customer contract and is therefore responsible for all charges levied
under that contract. If the lessor applies for the water service then notwithstanding
the terms of section 94, the obligation to pay those charges to ActewAGL under
the contract rests on the lessor and not the tenant.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
74. In this event the abstraction charge is a charge levied by ActewAGL as part of the
cost of supplying the water albeit the charge is estimated in part by reference to
consumption with a minimum amount payable even where no consumption
occurs.
75. Turning to the issue raised at paragraph 69 above, namely which of prescribed
terms 44 or 46 applies in the present case. Prescribed term 44 speaks of charges
“associated with the supply” of water; whereas prescribed term 46 speaks of
charges “associated with the consumption” of water. The terms “associated with”
are vague and broad in nature. It could fairly be said that the abstraction charge is
“associated with” both the supply and consumption of water. Obviously it is not
possible to consume water that is not first supplied.
76. How does the Tribunal reconcile this second level of ambiguity now arising from
the Residential Tenancies Act 1997. In terms of public policy considerations, it is
not apparent that the public interest is better serve by imposing the abstraction
charge on either the lessor or the tenant. There are considerations which favour Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
both possibilities. The lessor may be better able to bear the cost and may be able
to seek some tax deductibility for the cost. On the other hand it is tenant who is
responsible for the environmental effects of consumption and to whom the
environmental price signal is best addressed.
77. In short the Tribunal simply does not know what the legislature intended in the
present context when it created the abstraction charge. Frankly the Tribunal
suspects that the legislature also had no clear idea of its implications in the context
of the present legislative schemes in the Utilities Act 2000 and the Residential
Tenancies Act 1997.
78. As the Tribunal is forced to come to some decision on the point, then the Tribunal
falls back upon the principle of statutory interpretation that the Residential
Tenancies Act 1997 is a species of beneficial legislation designed to regulate the
relationship between lessors and tenants, and further designed to provide a
measure of security and protection to tenants from exploitation; and as such any
ambiguity should be resolved in favour of an interpretation that is most beneficial
to the tenant.
79. Accordingly the Tribunal determines that prescribed term 44 applies and the
abstraction charge is one for the lessor.
80. The issue of the network facilities tax is much clearer. Section 8 Utilities (Network
Facilities Tax) Act 2006 imposes on ActewAGL a “tax”. The ICRC Declaration
No 1 of 2006 made pursuant to section 4C ICRC Act describes the network tax as
being “a tax on a network facility on land in the ACT” and permits ActewAGL to
pass on this cost to “consumers” of utility services. This then raises the same issue
as above concerning who is the “consumer”.
81. However, unlike the case of the abstraction charge, it is sufficiently clear to the
Tribunal that the water network facility tax is a “tax” and accordingly prescribed
term 42(a) applies and the lessor cannot pass on this tax to the tenant.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Conclusion:
82. The tenant is to pay the lessor the sum of $1609.16 being:
(a) $97.14 for rent
(b) $162.00 for carpet cleaning
(c) $250.00 for damage to the kitchen cabinet
(d) $311.22 for water consumption
(e) $285.00 for repairs to locks
(f) $200.00 for repair to the hole in the living room wall
(g) $303.80 for repairs to the back door and bedroom door
83. The lessor is to pay the tenant the sum of $1195.90 being:
(a) $160.60 of abstraction charges previously paid by the tenant
(b) $15.30 for network facilities tax previously paid by the tenant
(c) $1020.00 for breach of the duty to provide an exclusive right of occupancy
84. The tenant is not required to pay the outstanding water abstraction charge or the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
network facilities tax.
A. Anforth