ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
BOLARAM v AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY AND ORS
(Civil Dispute) [2020] ACAT 108
XD 544/2020
Catchwords: CIVIL DISPUTE – claim for damages arising out of validly
issued stop notice on the grounds that work carried out
otherwise than in accordance with approved plans and in breach
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! of the Building Act – subsequent refusal to cancel stop notice –
certifier incorrectly assessed development as DA exempt and
issued building approval – approval requirements not met
because development does not comply with R11 (front setback)
of the Single Dwelling Housing Development Code –
development exceeds maximum permissible plot ratio of 50% as
a result of unauthorised enclosure of veranda after stop notice
issued – other unauthorised alterations to alfresco and terrace
areas carried out before stop notice was issued may require
additional areas to be included in calculation of gross floor area
– claim dismissed – turns on its own facts – no issue of principle
involved
Legislation cited: ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008, ss 18, 20
Building Act 2004 ss 29, 30, 32, 53, 55, 128, 149
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002 Chapter 8
Construction Occupations Licensing Act 2004, ss 103, 105
Planning and Development Act 2007 ss 133, Division 7.2.3
Public Sector Management Act 1994 s 21(8) Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Subordinate
Legislation cited: Single Dwelling Housing Development Code, R1, R11
Territory Plan - Definitions
Tribunal: Senior Member M Orlov (Presiding)
Senior Member G Trickett
Date of Orders: 11 December 2020
Date of Reasons for Decision: 11 December 2020
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) XD 544/2020
BETWEEN:
VENUMADHAVA RAO BOLARAM
Applicant
AND:
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
First Respondent
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! BEN GREEN
Second Respondent
JADE WALTERS
Third Respondent
TRIBUNAL: Senior Member M Orlov (Presiding)
Senior Member G Trickett
DATE: 11 December 2020
ORDER
The Tribunal orders that: Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
1. The application is dismissed.
………………………………..
Senior Member M Orlov
For and on behalf of the Tribunal
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction and overview
1. The applicant, Mr Bolaram, owns a block of land in Lawson with his wife on
which he is attempting to complete the construction of a substantial new home
as an owner builder. Building approval for the works was suspended on 3
December 2019 when a building inspector working in the Rapid Regulatory
Response Team (RRRT) of Access Canberra, issued a stop notice under section
53 of the Building Act 2004 (Building Act). An application to the Construction
Occupations Registrar for cancellation of the stop notice under section 55 of the
Building Act was refused on 21 May 2020. The stop notice remains in force.
2. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! The applicant claims that the Australian Capital Territory (Territory), Access
Canberra, Ms Jade Walters (the building inspector who issued the stop notice)
and Mr Ben Green (the Construction Occupations Registrar), are liable to him
for damages in tort, nuisance, under the Australian Consumer Law (ACL) and
under the Building Act, for loss suffered as a result of continuing delays and
additional costs caused by the stop notice remaining in force.
3. Access Canberra is a business unit1 within the Chief Minister, Treasury and
Economic Development Directorate of the Territory. It is not a separate legal
entity that can sue or be sued and accordingly, is not a proper party to the
application. The proper respondent is the Territory.
4. The second respondent, Mr Ben Green, is the Construction Occupations Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Registrar (Registrar) appointed under section 103 of the Construction
Occupations Licensing Act 2004 (COL Act). He is responsible, among other
things, for exercising certain functions under the Building Act, including
deciding an application by a landowner under section 55 of the Building Act for
cancellation of a stop notice. The decision to refuse the application in this case,
however, was made by the Deputy Construction Occupations Registrar, Mr
Nicholas Lhuede, pursuant to a delegation of the Registrar’s functions under
section 105 of the COL Act. 2 There is no evidence that Mr Green was involved
Public Sector Management Act 1994, section 21(8)
2 Construction Occupations (Building) Delegation 2018 (No 1)
in the initial decision to issue the stop notice, the subsequent decision not to
cancel the stop notice, or otherwise had any relevant dealings with the applicant.
5. The third respondent, Ms Jade Walters, is a building inspector appointed under
section 128 of the Building Act and at all material times was authorised by
section 53(2) to issue a stop notice in the circumstances provided for in section
53(1).
6. Section 149 of the Building Act states:
(1)The construction occupations registrar, a building inspector, or a
person who was the registrar or an inspector, is not civilly or
criminally liable in relation to anything done or omitted to be done
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! honestly by him or her in the exercise of a function under this Act.
(2)A civil or criminal liability that would, apart from this section, attach
to the construction occupations registrar or a building inspector
attaches instead to the Territory.
7. Section 149 is a complete defence to the applicant’s claims against Ms Walters
and Mr Green (apart from the fact that Mr Green does not appear to have had
any relevant involvement). The applicant does not allege that either respondent
failed to act honestly in doing or omitting to do anything in the exercise of their
respective functions in relation to issuing, or refusing to cancel, the stop notice.
Even if such an allegation had been made, section 149(2) makes it clear that
liability would attach to the Territory alone.
8. By an amended Civil Dispute Application dated 19 October 2020, the applicant
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
sought damages quantified at $110,311.48. The tribunal’s jurisdiction is limited
by section 18(2)(a) of the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
(ACAT Act) to civil dispute applications claiming amounts of not more than
$25,000. At the start of the hearing the applicant abandoned the claim for the
excess by limiting his claim to $25,000. This is permissible under section 20(2)
of the ACAT Act. The Tribunal therefore has jurisdiction to decide the
application.
9. The applicant also sought an order in the following terms:
I would like to request ACAT to issue a very strong warning and notice to
ACCESS CANBERRA and its relevant government departments and
Officers to rectify all the Housing Development documents and send all
the inexperienced staff back to appropriate training to follow the rules,
regulations, delivering service knowledge, and improve the reading skills
to interpret the documents and its contents correctly & more precisely to
the public, as they are in a position to deliver the valued public services to
the people by representing top state government departments.
10. The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to make such an order.
11. The only issue the Tribunal must decide is whether the Territory is liable to pay
damages to the applicant for the losses he claims.
12. The Tribunal is satisfied that the claim must be dismissed. The following
reasons explain why the Tribunal has come to that conclusion.
Background +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
13. The applicant and his wife are joint lessees of Block 5 Section 45 Lawson (the
land). The land fronts onto Dawn Crescent to the north and is separated from
the road by a concrete pathway and verge.
14. On the opposite (northern) side of Dawn Crescent, extending in an easterly
direction for a short distance and in a westerly direction to the shore of Lake
Ginninderra is a 130,785m2 area of vacant urban approved land3 comprising
Block 1, Section 56 Lawson. The northern boundary of that block adjoins a
1,426,988m 2 area of Commonwealth land (formerly the Belconnen Naval
Transmitting Station) comprising Block 2, Section 6 Lawson, part of which
Defence Housing Australia proposes to develop as an urban area known as
Lawson North. 4 Figure 2 in the Lawson South Concept Plan shows a grassland Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
buffer zone to the north of where Dawson Crescent is now located (although
streets are not shown) with a note stating: “Grassland buffer is to apply unless
otherwise indicated though a development control plan for Lawson North
(Commonwealth land) approved by the National Capital Authority”. Figure 2 in
the Development Control Plan for Block 2 Section 6 and Block 1 Section 16
Lawson (Belconnen Naval Transmitting Station) approved by the National
Capital Authority on 12 February 2013, depicts a strip of land adjoining the
northern boundary of Block 1 Section 56 described as an “asset protection
3 https://app.actmapi.act.gov.au/actmapi/index.html?viewer=basic
4 https://www.dha.gov.au/development/residential/lawson-act
zone”.5 The area may be used as an Outer Asset Protection Zone for the purpose AustLII AustLI
of providing bushfire protection to adjoining development in Lawson South.6
15. We mention these matters because both parties appear to assume that the land
on the opposite side of Dawn Crescent is open space, but neither has provided
the Tribunal with evidence of the fact. We are satisfied that it is appropriate to
treat it as such for the purposes of this application.
16. The applicant’s land is 888m2 in area. The maximum permissible plot ratio for a
single dwelling on a large block under R1 of the Single Dwelling Housing
Development Code (SDHDC) is 50%. The maximum permissible gross floor
area (GFA) of the building therefore is 444m2
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! .
17. GFA is defined in the Territory Plan. The relevant part of the definition
applicable to this development is “the sum of the area of all floors of the
building measured from the external faces of the exterior walls”.
18. Arch Space Design prepared plans for a seven-bedroom, two storey home in
early March 2018 (original plans). The original plans state the internal area of
the ground floor, garage and upper level as 444m2 and the total area under cover
as 612m 2 including two alfresco areas (65m2 ), two verandas (45m2 ), a porch,
,
balcony and covered terrace (40m2 ). They also show an open terrace on the
upper level (40m2 ), which is not included in the covered area calculations.
19. The applicant appointed Mr John Bates as the certifier for the project (the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
certifier). On 24 May 2018, the certifier issued an Exemption Assessment D
Notice certifying that the site work shown on the original plans is an exempt
development under section 133 of the Planning and Development Act 2007
(Planning Act) – i.e. the development does not require development approval.
On the same day, the certifier issued a building approval for the site work under
section 29 of the Building Act.
5 https://www.nca.gov.au/sites/default/files/DCP-1209-Block-2-Section-6-Block-1-Section-
16%20-Lawson-%20Belconnen-Naval-Transmitting%20Station.pdf
6 See paragraph 4.20 (Precinct D – Desired Planning Outcomes)
20. The applicant was issued with an Owner Builder Licence on 22 June 2018 and
subsequently commenced building work.
21. The Construction and Utilities Branch of Access Canberra includes a
Construction Audit Team (CAT), the functions of which include to inspect
building sites around Canberra to determine whether building work is being
carried out in accordance with the Building Act. Ms Tamara Blissenden is a
building inspector appointed under section 128 of the Building Act and has
worked in the CAT since October 2012.
22. On 22 November 2019, Ms Blissenden conducted a routine inspection of the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! building works on the applicant’s land. She identified several changes to the
dwelling that were not shown on the approved plans, which she photographed
and documented in a building works inspection report. She observed that some
areas marked as terraces on the approved plans were enclosed with walls and
under the roofline, causing her to be concerned that the areas should be included
in the calculation of GFA. Her report includes a recommendation that “a stop
notice be issued and the items identified in the report be brought to the attention
of the building certifier and builder for appropriate action. In addition an audit
against the single dwelling housing development code to be undertaken to verify
compliance with total gross floor area.”7 Before finalising the report,
Ms Blissenden discussed the proposed recommendations with her supervisor,
Mr Brian Connors, who agreed with them. Mr Connors is the Assistant Director
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
of the CAT.
23. Ms Blissenden emailed a copy of the report to the certifier and the applicant on
26 November 2019, noting that any amended plans must be submitted within
14 days unless an extension of time was requested.
24. At about the same time, Mr Connors forwarded the inspection report to the
Rapid Regulatory Response Team (RRRT) for action. In accordance with
internal procedures being trialled at the time, the CAT was responsible for
performing inspections and preparing building inspection reports. If further
7 Exhibit 1 page 9
action was required, including issuing a stop notice, the report was referred to
the RRRT for action.
25. The third respondent, Ms Walters, is a building inspector working in the RRRT.
She issued a stop notice to the applicant on 3 December 2019. The grounds
stated in the notice are that building work is being carried out otherwise than in
accordance with the approved plans for the work and contrary to a provision of
the Building Act relating to the building work. 8 The notice relevantly states:
I, Jade Walters, Building Inspector, hereby prohibit carrying out of
building work (proposed DA exempt single dwelling house) being
erected on the above mentioned parcel of land, pursuant to section 53(1)
of the Building Act 2004, until following matters have resolved:
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
1. Building Approval plans amended to show openings on external walls
consistent with the as [sic] built construction;
2. Any changes to the terraces, alfresco (if enclosed) areas must be
counted against the permissible Plot ratio requirements for the block.
(Original emphasis)
26. The stop notice suspended the operation of the building approval issued on
24 May 2018 in relation to all building work under the approval.9
27. An internal audit of the original plans by the CAT on 16 December 2019 did not
identify any issue with the GFA based on the areas provided on the site plan,
but found that the development did not comply with R10 (Bushfire), R11 (front
boundary setbacks – all blocks), R12 (side and rear setbacks – all blocks) and
R17 (allowable encroachments – setbacks) of the SDHDC. 10 Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
28. The applicant commissioned a drafting service to prepare amended plans, which
are dated 6 December 2019 (amended plans), showing changes he had made to
the building. On 20 December 2012, the certifier purported to approve the
amended plans and amend the building approval under section 32 of the
Building Act. The certifier lodged the approved amended building plans with
Access Canberra on 23 December 2019.
8 Exhibit 1 page 19
9 See section 53(3) of the Building Act
10 Exhibit 1 pages 73-81
29. Ms Blissenden audited the amended plans in early January 2020 against the
requirements of the SDHDC. She considered that the original issue of non-
compliance with the approved original plans was rectified by the amended plans
– i.e., the amended plans now showed the work as built – but identified several
issues where the development did not comply with the SDHDC, which she
brought to the attention of the certifier and the applicant in an email dated
17 January 2020. The email identified the following issues as requiring action:
Rule 1 – GFA – GFA has been calculated to exclude alfresco, veranda
and terraces. These areas are under the roofline and are substantially
enclosed (enclosed on more than 2 sides) and must be included in the
GFA.
AustLII AUstLII AustLll Austi
Rule 11 – Front Boundary setback - the upper balcony is not set back 6m.
A balcony is not an allowable encroachment under rule 17.
Rule 12 – Side and rear setbacks - Upper bed 3 window unscreened, must
be 6m setback for unscreened. Window has a sill height of 1.35m, must be
1.7m high to be part of external wall. Eastern upper story has no
tLI measurements on plans showing setback.
Rule 43 – Water sensitive urban design - 5000L tank required. 4000L tank
indicated on plans.
The stop notice will remain in place until all the above issues have been
addressed. [Original emphasis]
30. The applicant sent an email to the CAT on 29 January 2020 with the subject
heading “Request to eliminate the Stop Note immediately – Block 5, Section 45
Lawson”11 in which he claimed that the amended plans “fully complied” with
–
the SDHDC and that, as the certifier had approved the amended plans and
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
amended the building approval, the CAT should lift the stop notice. He
complained that, instead of doing so “the CAT team brought forward 4 more
new concerns in which 2 of them are totally irrelevant to the block against the
approved plans”.
31. The applicant argued that the calculation of GFA correctly excluded alfresco,
veranda and terrace areas “as they are external elements per SDHDC” for the
following reasons: 12
11 Exhibit 1 page 25
12 Exhibit 1 page 25
1. Alfresco 1 and Alfresco 2 have 2 openings at East Wall and South
Walls, as shown in the plans, which are not enclosed and kept open to
meet the planning requirements. Hence, they do not need to be
included in the GFA. As per the SDHDC, there is NO particular Rule
or Criteria is specified to have certain openings or size for Alfrescos.
2. Each Terrace at upper floor have 2 openings, which have minimum of
1.7/1.8 privacy walls/screens as per the planning requirements. As per
the SDHDC, there is NO particular Rule or Criteria is specified to
have certain openings for Terraces.
3. Veranda 1 and Veranda 2 has one side full openings, which is being
practical to the building design in consideration with SDHDC.
However, per the SDHDC, there is NO particular Rule or Criteria is
specified to have certain openings for Verandas.
32. He stated that the front boundary of the land was to open space, which meant
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
that the minimum upper floor balcony setback was 4m in accordance with Table
2C of R11, and not 6m as the CAT claimed. 13
33. The applicant advised that the window to bedroom 3 would be screened by
plantation shutters or would have frosted glass before a certificate of occupancy
was issued, and that a 5000L tank would be installed.14
34. The email concluded with a request that the stop notice be lifted immediately
and referred to the financial and personal stress the situation was causing him
and his family.15
35. On 6 February 2020, Mr Connors and Ms Blissenden met with the applicant and
the certifier to discuss the issues of non-compliance. Ms Blissenden explained
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
that “even if the areas are described as ‘terraces or verandas’ on the plans, if
they have more than two walls and are under the roofline then they must be
included in the gross floor area calculation”.16 The applicant maintained that the
CAT’s approach to the GFA and front boundary set back issue was based on an
incorrect interpretation of the SDHDC.
13 Exhibit 1 page 26
14 Exhibit 1 page 27
15 Exhibit 1 page 27
16 Exhibit 3 paragraph 36
36. The next day, Mr Connors sought advice from the Territory Plan Section about
the front boundary setback issue. Ms Alex Kaucz, who is the Senior Director of
the Territory Plan Section in the Planning, Land and Building Division of the
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, responded by
email on 7 February 2020 relevantly as follows:
The dwelling must comply with the standard front boundary setback (i.e.
UFL at 6m) as the front boundary is a street frontage. The front boundary
is considered to be open space when the boundary directly touches the
open space and not if there is a road separating them.
37. On 2 March 2020, Mr Connors and Ms Blissenden met with the certifier to
discuss his proposals to rectify the issues of non-compliance. The certifier
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! advised that he would prepare and submit amended plans setting out his
proposals. 17
38. Mr Connors emailed the certifier on 17 March 2020 to follow up on the
proposed plan changes.18 The certifier replied on 4 April 2020:
I would like to send through the proposed plan changes that I discussed
with you on 2 March 2020.
However, I must firstly obtain the owners permission/agreement and this
is not forthcoming.
The owner feels that he has been treated unfairly in that the SDHC is not
specific on how non habitable areas such as alfrescos, verandas, porches
and the like are treated in respect to the GFA calculation. The owner and
I did talk to an ACT Government Planner/Architect about it and they were
similarly doubtful about interpretation.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
In the circumstances, I consider that the owner should be given the benefit
of the doubt and that my Building Approval should be upheld and the Stop
Work Notice should be lifted.
There is also the allegation that the decision to issue the Stop Work Notice
was tainted and if this is verified it could be very painful for those
involved.
39. The allegation mentioned in the last paragraph of the email concerns a claim by
the applicant that Ms Blissenden was related to an electrician with whom the
17 Exhibit 3, paragraph 41
18 Exhibit 1 page 41
applicant had been in dispute over “pricing and unethical behaviour”19 AustLII AustLI The
.
Tribunal infers that the applicant was suggesting that this may have influenced
her conduct in the matter. Ms Blissenden denied the allegation on oath in her
statement and in her oral evidence to the Tribunal.20 The Tribunal accepts
Ms Blissenden’s evidence about this.
40. The applicant filed a civil dispute application in the ACAT on 22 April 2020,
claiming damages of $24,800 for additional costs incurred due to the stop notice
remaining in place.
41. The applicant’s email to the CAT dated 29 January 2020, mentioned earlier,
was +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! drawn to the attention of the Deputy Construction Occupations Registrar,
Mr Nicholas Lhuede, on about 5 May 2020. By then, the Construction and
Utilities Branch had decided to treat the applicant’s email as an application
under section 55 of the Building Act for cancellation of the stop notice. 21
42. As part of his investigations, Mr Lhuede asked Ms Blissenden to prepare a GFA
calculation based on the amended plans. A copy of her calculations is in
evidence. 22
43. On 21 May 2020, Mr Lhuede gave notice to the applicant of his decision not to
cancel the stop work notice. The notice gives the following reasons for decision,
which it is appropriate to reproduce in full:
16. In making a decision on whether or not to cancel the stop notice under Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
section 55, I must consider –
(a) The application; and
(b) The reasons why the stop notice was given; and
(c) The current state of the building work to which the notice relates.
17. I am satisfied of the following:
a. With regard to Rule 1 of the SDHDC, the GFA calculations for
the development must include the substantially enclosed
alfresco, terraces and balconies. On this basis, the Calculated
GFA is 642.94m2 for a block size of 888m2 This provides a
.
19 Exhibit A, applicant’s letter to the Registrar dated 22 October 2020 (3rd paragraph on the 2nd
page)
20 Exhibit 3 paragraphs 45-46
21 Exhibit 4 paragraph 14
22 Exhibit 1 pages 151-153
percentage of 72.4%, therefore the mandatory maximum plot
ratio allowance of 50% has been exceeded.
I am satisfied that the development does not meet rule 1 of the
SDHDC and as a consequence is not exempt from requiring a
development approval under the Planning and Development
Act 2007 unless the development is altered to be compliant.
b. With regard to Rule 11 of the SDHDC, the upper balcony faces
a roadway and is not set back 6m and does not comply with
Table 2C: front boundary setbacks – large blocks in
subdivisions approved after 2008.
I am satisfied that the development does not meet rule 11 of the
SDHDC and as a consequence is not exempt from requiring a
development approval under the Planning and Development
Act 2007 unless the development is altered to be compliant.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! c. With regardRule 12 – Side and rear setbacks. Rule 12 has now
been met as the certifier provided amended plans on 23
December 2019 that show screens to the windows and setbacks
indicated.
d. With regard Rule 43 – Water sensitive urban design. Rule 43
has now been met as the certifier has provided amended plans
on 23 December 2019 showing a 5000L tank indicated on the
plans.
18. The reasons given in the application to cancel the stop work notice
have been considered and I am satisfied that they have been
appropriately addressed both within this decision document and in
efforts to engage with the builder and building certifier.
19. I am satisfied that the grounds under s53(1)(d) and Section 53(1)(d) to
issue a the notice still exist under rules 1 and 11 of the SDHDC.
Notwithstanding other matters in the notice were addressed, the issues
associated with rules 1 and 11 are of significance and warrant the
issuance of this notice in their own right. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
20. Section 55(4) also gives provides me the discretion to cancel the stop
work notice if I am satisfied that the cancellation will not endanger the
public or people who will use the building on which the building work
is being done, or affect public confidence about the standard of
building work in the ACT.
21. The matters relating to rules 1 and 11 of the SDHDC do not endanger
the public or building users in this case. However revoking the stop
notice while the two of the five original grounds for issuance still exist
may affect public confidence in the role of the regulator and about the
standard of building work in the ACT.
22. I have decided that it is not appropriate for me to cancel the stop work
notice under section 55(4) of the Building Act [errors in original]
44. On 27 May 2020, the applicant emailed Mr Lhuede in response to the Notice of
Decision, taking issue with Mr Lhuede’s reasons for decision and venting his
frustration at the process and, as he sees it, the apparent inability of the CAT to
understand the meaning of R1 and R11 of the SDHDC as those rules apply to
his development. 23 The email ends with the following demands: 24
Not to elaborate anymore further here I request you again to cancel the
STOP NOTE immediately which raised against to my approved building
plans. All the structures were built based up on the Original building
development plans, which were approved in 2018 and the minor
amendments I made which were reapproved again by an authorised and
experienced Building Certifier, hence I would not need to make any
further modifications.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Please I request you to respond back by this Thursday COB with the
STOP NOTE cancellation, otherwise as I will not be having any other
option left, where I will take the issue to the High Court and claim as
mentioned compensations from ACCESS Canberra and CAT Employees
including the decision makers.
Also, I need an apology from your building inspectors, who misbehaved
and dis-respected me and took me for granted to drag this issue for
longer.
45. Mr Lhuede did not respond to the email. A mediation held on 27 July 2020
failed to resolve the dispute.
46. In response to an email from the applicant dated 4 August 2020 in which he set
out a series of questions, 25 the ACT Government Solicitor wrote to the applicant
on 4 September 2020 explaining the Territory’s position in relation to the front
boundary set back and GFA issues, among other things. AustLI Aust!Il AustLI AustLi
47. With respect to the front boundary setback, the letter states:26
4. Interpretation of R11 by reference to the subject site: The northern
boundary of the subject site adjoins a “road” as defined…27 and is
23 Exhibit 1 pages 87-97
24 Exhibit 1 page 97
25 Exhibit 1 page 273
26 Exhibit 1 page 289
27 ‘Road’ is defined in the Territory Plan to mean “any way or street (so called), whether in
existence or under reserve, open to the public which is provided and maintained for the passage
of vehicles, persons and animals and which may include footpaths, community paths, bus lay-
bys, light rail tracks, or traffic controls.”
therefore a “front boundary”.28 As per Table 2C (which applies to AustLII AustLI
large blocks in subdivisions approved on or after 31 March 2008, and
therefore applies to the subject site), the minimum front boundary
setback is 4m on the lower floor level and 6m at the upper level. The
garage is to be setback 5.5m and a minimum of 1.5m behind the front
building line29 except where there is a courtyard wall in the front zone.
48. Later, the letter states:
10.The upper floor level balcony is more than 1.5m above the finished
ground level and is therefore part of the building and is used to
establish the building line. The upper floor level balcony is setback
4.260m from the northern front boundary. This is less than the
minimum 6m required by Rule R11 of the SDHDC.
11.Rule R11 has a corresponding criterion (C11) which may be
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! considered subject to the submission of a Merit Track development
application (DA). This will require you to justify, through the DA, how
the upper floor level balcony meets Criteria C11 of the SDHDC
(please see more information below on submission of a DA).
49. With respect to the GFA issue, the letter states:
5. The plans as submitted on 23 December 2019 show a Veranda 1,
Veranda 2 and an Alfresco 1 on the ground floor and, a roofed terrace
with outdoor kitchenette accessed from the living area, a roofed
terrace accessed from Bed 3 and a small roofed terrace accessed
through the Walk In Robe (WIR). Some of these rooms as depicted on
the plans are considered to contribute to the GFA because a
measurement can be taken between their walls as outlined in the
definition of GFA…This therefore takes the total GFA for the
development above 444m2 and exceeds the 50% plot ration in
contravention of R1.
6. Verandah 1 and Verandah 2 are substantially open to ground level and Must!Il Aust !!! AustLI AustLi
accessible at grade from the adjacent private open space and are
therefore not considered to add to the GFA.
7. Alfresco 1 on the ground level will also be excluded from GFA if the
2100mm wide window and supporting wall are removed to ground
level to substantially open this space and provide ready access at
grade from the adjacent private open space.
28 ‘Font boundary’ is defined in the Territory Plan to mean “any boundary of a block adjacent to
a public road, public reserve or public pedestrian way.”
29 ‘Building line’ is defined in the Territory Plan to mean “a line drawn parallel to any front
boundary along the front face of the building or through the point on a building closest to the
front boundary. A terrace, landing, porch, balcony, deck or veranda that is more than 1.5 m
above finished ground level or is covered by a roof is deemed to be part of the building. A
fence, courtyard wall or retaining wall is not deemed to be part of the building.”
8. The roofed terrace accessed from Bed 3 and the small roofed terrace
accessed through the WIR will also be excluded from GFA, subject to
replacing the south facing 1.7m high privacy wall for each terrace with
a balustrade.
9. The roofed terrace with outdoor kitchenette accessed from the living
area currently contributes to GFA. To avoid this, both the east and
west facing walls should be removed and opened up at grade level with
the adjacent open terrace. If this is not possible, and as a compromise,
the Territory would accept the south facing privacy wall of this terrace
being replaced with a balustrade and the west or east facing wall of
the roofed terrace being removed and opened up at grade level with
the adjacent open terrace. It is acknowledged supporting columns and
beams may be required to support the roof.
50. The applicant has not lodged a development application and the stop notice
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
remains in place.
51. On 29 October 2020, Mr Jonathan Swale and Mr Joel Muir, both building
inspectors working for Access Canberra, inspected the site. They observed that
the property was at approximately lock-up stage and was nearing completion.
The internal linings, floor coverings other than carpet, kitchen joinery, baths,
showers, and most internal fixings were installed. A copy of their report,
including photos showing the state of completion, is in evidence.30
52. When Ms Blissenden inspected the building work on 22 November 2019, the
work was approaching pre-sheet stage; timber framing was fully visible; there
was ladder access only to the upper level; external walls were half painted and
half bare render and external cladding was incomplete. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
53. It is apparent, therefore, that the applicant failed to comply with the stop notice
and has continued carry out building work while building approval for the work
remains suspended.
54. One of the photographs taken on 29 October 2020 shows that the applicant has
fully enclosed Veranda 2. 31 In his oral evidence to the Tribunal, he admitted that
internal door access to the enclosed space remains but claimed that he intended
closing this off to make the space inaccessible. He claimed this would result in
30 Exhibit 1 document A11, pages 99 to 150
31 Exhibit 1 page 138
the space not being counted towards the GFA. Whether or not doing so will
produce the desired result is debatable but is not an issue the Tribunal has to
decide here. However, the logic of the applicant’s decision to enclose Veranda 2
is difficult to understand. Veranda 2 previously did not contribute to the GFA.
By enclosing the space, which currently remains internally accessible, it does
contribute to GFA. As a result, on any view, the development in its current form
exceeds the permissible plot ratio under R1 of the SDHDC.
The determinative issue – front setback
55. The certifier is solely responsible for assessing whether a development is DA
exempt. A certifier may issue a building approval for a development that does
not +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! have development approval only if the development is an exempt
development under section 133 of the Planning Act – i.e., if the plans meet all
of the relevant codes and design requirements applicable to the development. In
this case the relevant code is the SDHDC.
56. Although approved plans must be lodged with Access Canberra, it is not part of
the Territory’s statutory functions to independently assess the correctness or
otherwise of a certifier’s assessment at the time of lodgement. If a certifier
wrongly issues a building approval in the mistaken belief that a development is
DA exempt, building work is not excused from requiring development approval.
If, because of an inspection by an authorised building inspector, it is found that
building work is being carried out without a valid building approval, the
inspector is authorised to issue a stop notice. If the owner suffers loss as a result, Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
the owner may have a right to claim compensation from the certifier. But the
owner does not have any right to claim compensation from the Territory in
those circumstances.
57. The original and amended plans do not comply with the front setback
requirements in Rule R11. Table 2C applies to this development. The minimum
front boundary setback is 4m for the lower floor level, 6m for the upper floor
level and 5.5m for the garage, which must be a minimum of 1.5m behind the
front building line except where there is a courtyard wall in the front zone,
which is not the case here. The upper floor level balcony has a 4.26m setback
from the front boundary and therefore does not comply.
58. The exception for a “minimum front boundary setback to open space or
pedestrian paths wider than 6m”, upon which the applicant relies, does not
apply. The front boundary is not “to open space”. The use of the word “to”
indicates that the front boundary of the land must be contiguous with the
boundary of the open space. The applicant claims that the exception applies
where the front boundary “faces to open space”. 32 The applicant is mistaken.
That is not what the rule states.
59. The development as designed and as built does not comply with R11. Several
consequences flow inevitably from that finding, which we set out below.
60. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! First, the development is not, and never has been, an exempt development
within the meaning of section 133 of the Planning Act.
61. Second, the development requires, and always has required, development
approval in the merit track under Division 7.2.3 of the Planning Act.
62. Third, neither the original plans nor the amended plans meet the approval
requirement in section 29(1)(g) of the Building Act because the plans show site
work that, if carried out in accordance with the plans, is not exempt under the
Planning Act from requiring development approval. As a result, the certifier was
prohibited by section 30 of the Building Act from issuing a building approval
for the original plans and later, approving the amended plans.
63. Fourth, there were valid grounds for a stop notice to be issued on 3 December Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
2019 and subsequently for the stop notice not to be cancelled. The applicant
does not dispute that he carried out building work otherwise than in accordance
with the approved plans. The submission of amended plans on 23 December
2019 does not mean that the grounds for the stop notice ceased to exist because
the building work formed part of a development that required development
approval, which the applicant did not have. Neither the original building
approval nor the amended building approval was validly issued in accordance
with, respectively, section 28 and section 32 of the Building Act.
32 Email from the applicant to Mr Lhuede dated 27 May 2020, sent in response to the Notice of
Decision refusing to cancel the stop notice – Exhibit 1 at page 95
64. Fifth, unless and until the applicant obtains development approval, building
work cannot lawfully continue and the applicant and his family cannot lawfully
occupy the house at completion. The applicant’s current problems are
compounded by the fact that he has continued to carry out building work in
breach of the stop notice – i.e., without development approval and without
building approval – to the point where the site work appears to be nearing
completion.
The GFA issue
65. It is important to observe that this application does not involve an administrative
review of the decision to issue the stop notice, or later not to cancel the stop
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! notice. The stop notice was validly issued and remains in force. The only way
the applicant can lawfully complete the building work and commence to occupy
his new home is to obtain development approval. The unauthorised enclosure
of Veranda 2 means that the development exceeds the maximum permissible
plot ratio under R1 of the SDHDC, which is a mandatory requirement.
66. It will be apparent from the background facts set out earlier that the question
whether unauthorised changes made to the alfresco and terrace areas means that
those areas also should be included in the calculation of GFA is likely to be a
critical and potentially contentious issue when and if the applicant seeks
development approval.
67. If the ACT Planning and Land Authority refuses development consent on the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
grounds that the development exceeds the maximum permissible plot ratio
under R1, it will be open for the applicant to apply to the ACAT for
administrative review of the decision. Any views the Tribunal may express on
the calculation of GFA in determining the present civil dispute application
would not finally determine the issue and would not bind a differently
constituted tribunal that may have to determine an application for administrative
review of a decision to refuse development consent.
Conclusion
68. Neither party considered the evidentiary and legal requirements set out in
Chapter 8 of the Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002, which governs (and limits) the
civil liability in tort of the Territory. Nor did the applicant identify any legal
basis for a claim that the Territory may be held liable to pay compensation
under the Australian Consumer Law or the Building Act. Having regard to the
Tribunal’s earlier findings in relation to front setback issue, the failure to do so
has no bearing on the outcome. The Tribunal is satisfied, based on those
findings, that the application must be dismissed.
………………………………..
Senior Member M Orlov
For and on behalf of the Tribunal
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Date(s) of hearing 23 November 2020
Applicant: In person
Solicitors for the Ms Z Robens, ACT Government Solicitor
Respondent:
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi