ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
PATEL v CONSERVATOR OF FLORA AND FAUNA
(Administrative Review) [2020] ACAT 105
AT 41/2020
Catchwords: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW – application for removal of a
tree – whether the tree presents an unacceptable risk from falling
branches – whether cracking damage to the house is caused by
the tree – whether it is also demonstrated that all other
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! reasonable remedial and mitigation measures have been
determined to be ineffective – decision under review confirmed
Legislation cited: ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008 ss 26, 69
Tree Protection Act 2005 ss 8, 10, 15, 21, 25, 107B
Subordinate
Legislation cited: Tree Protection (Approval Criteria) Determination 2006 (No
2) DI2006-60
Cases cited: Bozin v Conservator of Flora and Fauna [2010] ACAT 91
Maatouk v Conservator of Flora and Fauna [2015] ACAT 10
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Tribunal: Senior Member A Davey (Presiding)
Senior Member D Kerslake
Date of Orders: 9 December 2020
Date of Reasons for Decision: 9 December 2020
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) AT 41/2020
BETWEEN:
RAHUL PATEL
Applicant
AND:
CONSERVATOR OF FLORA AND FAUNA
Respondent
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
TRIBUNAL: Senior Member A Davey (Presiding)
Senior Member D Kerslake
DATE: 9 December 2020
ORDER
The Tribunal orders that:
1. The decision under review dated 15 May 2020 is confirmed.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
………………………………..
Senior Member A Davey
For and on behalf of the Tribunal
AustLII AustLI
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. This is an application pursuant to section 107B of the Tree Protection Act 2005
(the Tree Protection Act). The applicant Dr Rahul Patel has sought review of
a decision made by the Conservator of Flora and Fauna (the respondent)
refusing1 to approve removal of a tree at Block 8 Section 51 Turner ACT (the
premises). The tree is a Carya illinoensis, commonly known as a pecan tree.
2. The applicant, together with his wife Ann Patel (the lessees), purchased the
premises in 2016. The tree is in the middle of the back yard, measuring some
18 metres in height with a canopy width of similar dimensions.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
3. The lessees state that they became concerned over the course of a two-year
period following purchase when several branches fell to the ground in their back
yard and into an adjoining property. In 2018 they applied to the respondent for
permission to remove the tree. 2 The tree was not listed on the ACT Tree
Register but was nevertheless protected under section 8 of the Tree Protection
Act because it both exceeded 12 metres in height and had a canopy more than
12 metres wide. Permission was refused. The lessees state that they became
further concerned when they later noticed widening cracks at the side and rear
of the house. They arranged for the house to be inspected by a structural
engineer, who advised that the cracks were caused by the interaction between
the tree’s roots and the surrounding soil.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
4. The lessees thereupon lodged a second request with the respondent, seeking
permission to remove the tree. 3 That application was refused on 17 March
20204 prompting the lessees to seek an internal review of the decision. 5 In
,
accordance with section 107(1) of the Tree Protection Act, the application for
reconsideration was referred to a Tree Advisory Panel (TAP) for advice. A
member of the TAP inspected the tree and reported that the tree did not meet
1 T documents pages 110-131
2 Amended supplementary T documents pages 1-17
3 T documents pages 63-75
4 T documents pages 76-83
5 T documents pages 84-95, amended supplementary T documents pages 18-25
any of the criteria for removal. 6 AustLII AustLI At a meeting on 12 May 2020 the TAP
endorsed the report and recommended refusal of the application for
reconsideration. 7 On 15 May 2020 the respondent upheld the original decision. 8
On 18 May 2020 a delegate of the respondent formally notified the applicant of
the decision. 9 On 12 June 2020 the applicant applied to the ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal for an order to set aside the reconsidered decision and
approve the tree’s removal. 10
Applicable legislation
5. Section 8 of the Tree Protection Act defines a protected tree to include a
‘regulated tree’. Section 10(1) includes the threshold criteria for a regulated tree
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
as a living tree that:
(a) is 12m or more high; or
(b) has a trunk with a circumference of 1.5m or more, 1m above natural
ground level; or
(c) has two or more trunks and the total circumference of all the trunks, 1m
above natural ground level, is 1.5m or more; or
(d) has a canopy 12m or more wide.
6. Section 15 of the Tree Protection Act renders it an offence to damage a
protected tree without first obtaining approval from the conservator. The matters
to which the conservator must have regard to in making such a decision are set Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
out in section 25(3), namely:
(a) the approval criteria;
(b) the advice (if any) of the advisory panel;
(c) the advice (if any) of an entity to which the application was referred under
section 24A; and
(d) anything else the conservator considers relevant.
6 T documents pages 96-103
7 T documents pages 104-105
8 T documents pages 106-198
9 T documents pages 110-131
10 T documents pages 1-62
7. Section 21 provides that the Minister may determine approval criteria to be
applied by the conservator in considering an application to damage a regulated
tree.
8. Section 107B of the Tree Protection Act further provides for review of a
decision by the conservator by the tribunal following reconsideration of a
decision originally made under section 25.
9. The Tree Protection (Approval Criteria) Determination 2006 (No 2)11 (the
approval criteria) made under section 21 of the Tree Protection Act sets out
the criteria to be applied in determining whether to give approval for damage to
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! a regulated tree in Schedule 1, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph (1):
(1) The Conservator of Flora and Fauna (the conservator) may give an
approval to damage a regulated tree under section 25 when:
(a) the tree is in decline and its life expectancy is short; or
(b) the tree represents an unacceptable risk to public or private
safety; or
(c) the tree is shown to be causing or threatening to cause
substantial damage to a substantial building, structure or
service; or
(d) the location of the tree is inappropriate given its potential size
and growth habit (excluding remnant eucalypts); or
(e) the tree is substantially affecting solar access to the lessees
lease, or neighbouring lease, during winter between the hours
of 9am to 3pm and pruning is not sufficient to remedy this
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
(excluding remnant eucalypts); or
(f) the tree is causing an allergic reaction to an occupant of the
lease, or neighbouring lease, and the claim can be supported
by certification from a relevant medical specialist; or
(g) where the tree is part of a close planting of a number of trees,
the removal of the tree will allow the other trees to develop;
and
all other reasonable remedial treatments and risk mitigation measures
have been determined to be ineffective.
10. Section 69 of the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008 (the ACAT
Act) provides that in reviewing administrative decisions the Tribunal ‘stands in
the shoes’ of the original decision maker. That is to say, the Tribunal exercises
11 Disallowable Instrument DI2006—60
the same powers and discretion as those available to the original decision maker
and its determination is taken to be the decision of the original decision maker.
11. Section 26 of the ACAT Act provides that in considering each case the Tribunal
may inform itself in any way it considers appropriate in the circumstances.
The application
12. The applicant contends that the correct and preferable decision is for the
Tribunal to set aside the respondent’s decision and find that the approval criteria
for removing the tree are met, in that: (a) the tree (in the applicant’s view)
represents an unacceptable risk to private safety;12 (b) the tree is shown to be
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! causing substantial damage to a substantial structure;13 and (c) all other remedial
treatments and risk mitigation measures have been determined to be
ineffective. 14 The applicant did not seek to argue that criteria (a) or (d)-(g)15
were applicable.
The hearing
13. The applicant represented himself, assisted by Mrs Ann Patel. He called as
witnesses Mr Tarek El-Ansary (structural engineer), Mrs Ann Patel, Mr Adam
Bak (neighbour), Mr Thomas Clark (resident), Mr Kieran Wallace (arborist),
and Mr Matthew McGuinness (building inspector). Mr Nigel Oram, of counsel,
represented the respondent, and called as witnesses Mr Linden Coot (structural
engineer) and Dr Peter Coyne (chair of the Tree Advisory Panel).
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
14. On the morning of the hearing which commenced on 21 September 2020 the
Tribunal conducted an onsite inspection of the premises, and an adjoining
property which has branches overhanging it from the tree, in the presence of the
applicant and Mrs Patel, witnesses for the applicant, the respondent’s legal
representatives, officers of the respondent, and the respondent’s witnesses.
12 Relating to criterion (b) in the approval criteria—Tree Protection (Approval Criteria)
Determination 2006 (No 2)—i.e. Schedule 1, paragraph 1(1)b
13 Relating to criterion (c) in the approval criteria, i.e. Schedule 1, paragraph 1(1)c
14 Addressing the final clause in Schedule 1, paragraph 1(1), of the approval criteria, which
must be met in all cases
15 Approval criteria, Schedule 1, paragraph 1(1)
15. The Tribunal’s attention was drawn to cracks in the walls of the house at the
premises. The Tribunal noted the position and character of the tree in the back
yard and observed dead branches which were said to have fallen from the tree in
the past. The Tribunal noted the general topography of the block and the
location of the tree in relation to the house, and the extent of the canopy in
relation to the property boundary and the pool and other features on the
adjoining property. While on site the Tribunal was also shown features of the
stormwater drainage, and of the street tree in front of the premises.
Issues to be determined
16. The issues for determination are:
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
(a) whether any of the approval criteria are satisfied, in this case relating to:
(i) criterion (b), as to whether the tree presents an unacceptable risk
(from falling branches), or
(ii) criterion (c) whether the cracking damage to the house is caused by
the tree;
(b) and if either of these criteria is satisfied, whether it is also demonstrated
that all other reasonable remedial and mitigation measures have been
determined to be ineffective.
Consideration of issues
Risk from falling branches
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
17. It was not disputed by either party that all trees pose some level of risk in that
they all drop branches from time to time. The issue to be decided – as set out in
the approval criteria – is whether this particular tree poses an unacceptable
degree of risk. The Tribunal accepts that the applicant and Mrs Patel, together
with their tenants and their neighbour, have a level of apprehension about the
risks they consider to be associated with this tree. It was quite evident from the
several witnesses for the applicant, and demonstrated at the field inspection, that
falling branches had been observed on a number of occasions, and that while no
injuries had actually resulted, residents and neighbours were apprehensive about
the risk of injury or worse, and said they had reduced the extent of the usage
they would otherwise make of the area beneath the tree.
18. Mr Tom Clark, a resident at the premises, gave evidence16 that he had observed AustLII AustLI
branches fall from the tree, and as a consequence he was careful to use the back
yard sparingly. He considers the tree to be dangerous. Mr Adam Bak, a
neighbour whose yard is partly underneath the canopy of the tree, gave
evidence17 that the tree dropped debris including branches into his yard and
pool, and that he had reported the fall of larger branches to the applicant or Mrs
Patel. Mrs Patel gave evidence18 about the history of dealing with the issues
associated with the tree, about her research in obtaining background information
about the species19, about her frustrations in getting practical help to deal with
the risk, and the significant delays caused by the fact a powerline was involved.
It was clear that she was quite apprehensive about the risk from falling branches
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
for residents of the premises and its neighbour. Dr Peter Coyne, with
qualifications in forestry and with experience in statistical analysis and risk
management, and current chair of the Tree Advisory Panel, gave evidence20 on
behalf of the respondent in which he reviewed the literature submitted by the
applicant21, stating that branch drop was extremely common in a very wide
range of species. His opinion was that this particular species was regarded as
generally strong, that this specimen was generally healthy and well structured,
and in relation to the many other species observed in the Canberra urban
environment, with normal maintenance this specimen did not present unusual or
elevated risk.
19. The applicant called into question some aspects of the risk assessment Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
undertaken by Dr Coyne, pointing out also that the minutes of the Tree
Advisory Panel recorded little of substance on critical aspects of its
consideration of the application, especially on the subject of risk assessment.
The Tribunal agrees that more detailed minutes were desirable (although this
would not have altered the findings set out below).
16 Exhibit A4
17 Exhibit A5
18 Exhibit A6
19 Exhibit A6, annexes 3-7
20 Exhibit R3
21 Exhibit A6, annexes 3-7
20. The applicant argued that the precautionary principle22 should determine the AustLII AustLI
outcome in assessing the risk from the tree. On the other hand, two tree experts
who gave evidence in the hearing were very clear that in considering the risk
posed by the tree, likelihood was as important a determinant as consequence.
The applicant called as a witness Mr Kieran Wallace, an experienced arborist
with extensive industry accreditation, and qualified in the QTRA23 risk
assessment framework. He had provided the applicant with quotes for removal
of the tree, or for several levels of pruning. 24 He told the Tribunal that although
he had not been asked by the lessees to provide a risk assessment, based on his
QTRA training if he had completed one he doubted that he would have
concluded there were risk grounds to recommend removal of the tree. He gave a
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
convincing explanation as to the several factors in relation to this tree which
resulted in quotes for pruning options consistent with the relevant standard25, or
for approved work beyond it, involving quite significant costs. Mr Wallace
explained that once initial treatment was completed, the costs of regular follow-
up maintenance would be significantly less. In his view, a minor prune under
the Australian Standard AS4373 is all that he would recommend from a risk
perspective.
21. This view concurred with the evidence presented by Dr Coyne on behalf of the
respondent, who contended that adoption of the precautionary principle
contended by the applicant would be inconsistent with the Tree Protection Act.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
22. When the evidence of both experts is taken into account, in particular their
agreement that the risk presented by the tree is not unacceptable, and in the
absence of other persuasive evidence, the Tribunal is not satisfied that evidence
has been demonstrated to conclude that the requirements of approval criterion
(b)26 have been met, sufficient to support removal of the tree.
22 For example, lack of full scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing
preventive action
23 Quantified Tree Risk Assessment
24 Annex 9 (quote for minor prune) & Annex 10 (quote for major prune) to Exhibit A6,
witness statement of Ann Patel
25 Australian Standard on Pruning of Amenity Trees AS4373-2007
26 The tree represents an unacceptable risk to public or private safety.
Damage to buildings and whether the damage is attributable to the tree
23. It remains to consider the application of approval criterion (c). 27 It was not in
dispute that the buildings at the premises constitute substantial structures.
24. Called as a witness by the applicant, Mr El-Ansary28 gave extensive evidence
that in his opinion the cracking in the walls of the house is both substantial and
consistent with being caused by the tree. On questioning by the respondent,
Mr El-Ansary conceded that most of his long and diverse professional
experience was in heavy deeply founded construction, although he had
experience of remedial work in residential construction. His conclusions about
the evidence were based on his classification of the site soil conditions as being
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! highly reactive, even though the soil test he had commissioned had not included
an independent site classification. Mr Coot29, called as a witness by the
respondent and with a background in residential forensic and remediation work,
was strongly of the view that the site had been mis-classified, that the cracking
was fairly normal, and that in any case while the tree likely made some
contribution to the cracking, there were other significant contributions,
especially from poor drainage around the site. In his opinion the indicators
showed that there was inadequate or marginal fall in the drainage system. He
argued that the evidence on site provides much stronger support for contribution
from abnormal drainage than from the tree. His conclusions were based on a
plumber’s camera survey of the pipework, but apart from a summary sketch, the
results had not been included in his report. The structural engineers were in
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
broad agreement about many of the technical aspects of site classification and
application of the provisions of the standard30, but were not in agreement about
the actual site classification at the premises31, the extent to which some of the
guidelines were applicable in the soil and climatic conditions found in Canberra,
in interpreting the structural significance of the cracking observed in the
building at the premises, or in attributing the observed cracking predominantly
27 The tree is shown to be causing or threatening to cause substantial damage to a substantial
building, structure or service.
28 Exhibit A1
29 Exhibit R1
30 Australian Standard for Residential slabs and footings AS2870-2011, Section 2
31 Categorisation of the site under the standard was sensitive to soil classification, and therefore
the conclusions that might be drawn about the significance of the cracking was also sensitive
to site classification
to the tree. Mr Coot did not agree with Mr El-Ansary’s opinion that the shape of
the cracking enabled determination of direction to the source or was a reliable
means of proving causation. While both witnesses were clearly well qualified,
on these issues the evidence of Mr Coot was generally more persuasive than that
of Mr El-Ansary, in justifying his opinions and in explaining the links between
the principles on which they were based and the conclusions he would draw
from the evidence. Mr Coot disputed that the extent of cracking even constituted
substantial damage under the Australian Standard AS2870, and his opinion was
that the most appropriate remedial measures would involve removal of the
abnormal moisture conditions, in this case by repairing leaks, removing ponding
and ensuring more adequate fall in the drainage system.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
25. The applicant contended that the cracks in the house became substantially worse
during the period 2018-2020 and that this is not accounted for in the Coot
analysis. In support of that contention, the applicant called Mr Matthew
McGuinness, a building inspector who had compiled the building report32 at the
time the applicant and Mrs Patel had purchased the property in 2016.
Mr McGuinness stated that he had not observed any cracks as great as 5mm or
wider at that time, though he conceded he had not measured the width of the
cracks he did observe. Even accepting that the cracks may have worsened over
this period, the Tribunal would still need to be satisfied, in accordance with the
approval criteria, that the tree was the major or at least a substantial contributor
to this outcome as opposed to other possible significant causes. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
26. In that regard the Tribunal notes the acknowledgement by Mr Coot, witness for
the respondent, that the tree likely made some contribution to the existing
damage. Other possible causes were canvassed in evidence to the Tribunal,
however. Variation in moisture content because of changes in weather patterns
(possibly in conjunction with, but also possibly independently of, interaction
with tree roots) was one. Temporary or ongoing failure of drainage was another.
The Tribunal also notes a report on subsurface sampling commissioned by Mr
El-Ansary on the applicant’s behalf. While Mr El-Ansary concluded, based on
that report, that the soil character in the zone of the tree was “highly reactive
32 Witness statement of Matthew McGuinness, dated 16 July 2020, to which is attached a
property inspection report dated 5 July 2016
clay”, the report added the rider that the results provided “are indicative of the
sub-surface conditions only at the specific sampling and/or testing locations,
and then only to the depths investigated and at the time the work was carried
out”. 33 The report itself did not “include comment on the possible cause(s) of
the existing wall cracking, nor the influence or otherwise of the soil conditions
present”, 34 noting also that “groundwater conditions rarely remain constant and
can change seasonally due to variations in rainfall, temperature, soil
permeability and other factors”. 35 In the final analysis, the Tribunal is left with a
number of possible causes of the damage to the house, none of which can be
discounted based on the evidence presented. The Tribunal is unable, therefore,
to conclude on the balance of probabilities, that the tree has been demonstrated
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
to be the cause of substantial damage to the structure of the house.
Conclusions
27. Under the Tree Protection Act it is incumbent on the applicant to demonstrate
that at least one of the approval criteria has been met, and if so also to
demonstrate that all other reasonable remedial and mitigation measures have
been determined to be ineffective.36
28. In its assessment of the evidence relating to the two criteria on which the
applicant sought to establish that the tree should be approved for removal, the
Tribunal has concluded that it cannot be satisfied either criterion has been met.
29. While there is always a level of risk associated with the possibility of branches Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
falling from any tree, this particular case requires persuasive evidence that the
tree poses an unacceptable risk to private or public safety. For the reasons set
out above, the Tribunal is not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that this
test has been met.
30. In relation to damage to the house structure, the Tribunal is not satisfied on the
balance of probabilities that the tree has been demonstrated to be the dominant
33 Douglas Partners Report dated 3rd August 2020, Exhibit A1, Attachment A page 4
34 Douglas Partners Report dated 3rd August 2020, Exhibit A1, Attachment A page 1
35 Douglas Partners Report dated 3rd August 2020, Exhibit A1, Attachment A page 3
36 Bozin v Conservator of Flora and Fauna [2010] ACAT 91; Maatouk v Conservator of Flora and Fauna
[2015] ACAT 10
causal factor involved, and that the contribution from any other potential causal
factor is not significant.
31. The second part of the test under the approval criteria requires persuasive
evidence to establish the ineffectiveness and unreasonableness of remedial
measures other than removal. Because the first parts of the relevant criteria have
not been met, the second part of the test under the criteria does not arise, but the
Tribunal notes for completeness that it is not satisfied that alternative treatments
have been demonstrated to be ineffective or unreasonable.
32. The Tribunal therefore confirms the decision of the respondent to refuse
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! permission for removal of the tree.
………………………………..
Senior Member A Davey
For and on behalf of the Tribunal
Date(s) of hearing 27 October 2020
Applicant: In person
Counsel for the Respondent: Mr N Oram
Solicitors for the ACT Government Solicitor
Respondent:
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi