istLll AustLII AustLI
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
CITATION: FIRESTONE AND KENNETT/LAUGESEN [2007] ACTDT 6 (27
JUNE 2007)
DT 06/393 and DT 06/394
Catchwords: +LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aus Disability discrimination in education and employment – complaint out
of time before Commissioner - nature of the complaint referred to the
tribunal - strike out application – aid, abet, counsel or procure –
victimisation.
Discrimination Act 1991 ss 8, 10, 73, 81(2)(c), 89.
Post November 2006 ss 68, 79, 81.
Human Rights Commission Act 2005 ss 53, 78(1), 80, 99, 115.
Clean Ocean Foundation v Environment Protection Authority (2003)
VAR 227 at 230-231.
Davies v Hawthorn [2004] ACTSC 119 (22 November 2004).
Firestone and Legal Aid Office (ACT) [2006] ACTDT 3.
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
(1964) 112 CLR 125 at 129).
Holloway –v- Gilport Pty Ltd (1995) 79 A Crim R 76 at 89.
Jones v Great Western Railway Co [1930] 144 LT 194. Must !! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Kay Chaisty and City of Perth [2004] WAEOT 3.
Lucy Couper and ACT Housing DT03/18 dated 22 June 2004.
Neil –v- Nott and another (1994) 121 ALR 148 at 150.
Tribunal: Mr G C Lalor, Deputy President
Date: 27 June 2007
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
stl AustLll AustLll AustL
RE: MICHAEL FIRESTONE
Complainant
AND: DR AMANDA LAUGESEN
Respondent
AND: DR JEANETTE KENNETT
Respondent
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
ORDER
Tribunal : Mr G C Lalor, Deputy President
Date : 27 June 2007
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS that pursuant to Section 79 of the Discrimination Act
1991 the complaint in each matter be struck out on the ground that it lacks substance.
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
…………………
Deputy President
stl AustLll AustLll AustL
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY ) AustLII AustLI
RE: MICHAEL FIRESTONE
Complainant
AND: DR AMANDA LAUGESEN
Respondent
AND: DR JEANETTE KENNETT
Respondent
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! REASONS
27 June 2007 Mr G C Lalor, Deputy President
1. This is an application, in both of these matters, to strike out an application to
the Tribunal brought by Michael Firestone, referred to as the respondent in
these reasons for decision. The applicants are Dr Jeanette Kennett and Dr
Amanda Laugesen who are both referred to as the applicant in each matter in
these reasons.
2. The respondent, on 29 November 2005, filled in an ACT Human Rights Office
complaint form in each matter. In those applications he alleged discrimination
because of a psychological disability he said he possessed. In relation to both
complaints, he alleged victimisation because he had made a discrimination
complaint. In the complaint against Dr Kennett he alleged the unfavourable
treatment occurred in education and in employment in the complaint against Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Dr Laugesen.
3. Following investigation of both complaints, the ACT Human Rights and
Discrimination Commissioner advised the respondent on 1 May 2006 that she
was taking no further action on either of his complaints on several bases – that
they lacked substance and further that the complaints were out of time and
therefore she lacked jurisdiction.
4. On 3 May 2006 the respondent advised the Commissioner that he wished to
exercise his statutory right and have her refer both matters to the
Discrimination Tribunal. The Tribunal received both matters on 26 September
2006. The matter came before the Tribunal for directions on 5 October 2006
and the following directions were given:
stl AustLll AustLll AustL
1. The Complainant is to file a statement with the Tribunal by 4pm Friday 27 AustLII AustLI
October 2006 specifying:
a. The identity of any person alleged to have treated the Complainant
unfavourably;
b. The nature of the unfavourable treatment alleged and the place at
which and date on which it is said to have occurred;
c. The area in which the discrimination occurred (i.e. employment);
d. The grounds of the alleged discrimination (i.e. disability, race, sex
ect);
e. The grounds on which it is alleged the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
is apposite.
2. The Complainant is also to file with the Tribunal by 4pm Friday 27
October 2006:
a. A statement of any witness (including the Complainant’s statement)
proposed to be called to give evidence on behalf of the
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! b. Complainant on the hearing of this matter; A list of the documents to be relied on the hearing of this matter by
the Complainant from the documents forwarded to the Tribunal by
the Human Rights Office;
c. Any other material intended to be relied upon at the hearing of this
matter by the Complainant.
3. The Respondent is to file with the Tribunal by 4pm 17 November 2006 a
statement specifying:
a. The facts relied upon by the Respondent; and
b. The nature of any defence to the complaint of discrimination.
4. The Respondent is to file with the Tribunal by 4pm 17 November 2006:
a. A statement of any witness (including any statement from the
respondent) proposed to be called to give evidence on behalf of the
Respondent on the hearing of this matter.
b. A list of any documents to be relied upon on the hearing of this
matter by the Respondent from the documents forwarded to the
Tribunal by the Human Rights Office; and
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
c. Any other material intended to be relied upon at the hearing of this
matter by the Respondent.
5. The Complainant is to file with the Tribunal by 4pm 24 November 2006
any material in reply.
6. The matter is listed for hearing at 10am 6 December 2006 for two days.
5. On 28 October 2006 the applicants caused an application to strike out the
respondent’s claims to be filed in the Tribunal registry. These applications
were brought under Section 89 of the Discrimination Act 1991 and were listed
for hearing on 6 December 2006. The application did not proceed on that date
as the Tribunal was not satisfied that the respondent had provided appropriate
detail of his applications sufficient to enable the matter to be properly
presented. Further directions were given and the application was stood over
generally.
6. On 23 January the applicants requested orders to re-open their applications to
strike out the respondents applications following his filing of additional
materials to support his applications. Further directions were given on 24 AustLII AustLI
February that the respondent was to file by 12 February 2007 an outline in
writing of his submissions in response to the revised application to strike out
his original applications.
7. By notice dated 2 March 2007 the applications were listed for hearing to 21
and 22 June 2007.
8. The Discrimination Act 1991 was amended effective from 1 November 2006
and Section 89 has been amended and appears in the amended Act as Section
79. The amended terms are not substantially different for the purposes of
these applications.
9. Section 115 of the Human Rights Commission Act 2005 provides:
“(1) This Section applies if –
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! (a) a person applied to the discrimination tribunal under the pre-
amendment Discrimination Act, Section 89 to strike out a
complaint; and
(b) immediately before commencement day –
(i) the application had not been withdrawn; and
(ii) the tribunal had not decided the application.
(2) The application is taken to have been made under the Discrimination
Act 1991, Section 79 (Application to strike out complaint).”
10. In declining to take further action, following her investigation into the original
complaints raised by the respondent, the Commissioner’s powers were as set
out in the pre 1 November 2006, Discrimination Act 1991. The original
application to strike out the complaint, referred to the tribunal was under
Section 89 of that Act. When the matter came for hearing that was no longer
the applicable law. By virtue of Section 115 of the Human Rights Act 2005
the tribunal is to apply the law as contained in the amended Discrimination Act
1991. That has one significant ramification for the respondent’s complaint.
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
11. Section 81(2)(c) of the Discrimination Act 1991, prior to the amending Act
effective from 1 November 2006, provided that any complaint to the
Commissioner, in effect, had to be in relation to conduct that occurred within
12 months prior to the date of complaint or the last in a series of acts
complained of must have been within that time frame. If the conduct
complained of fell outside that time limit the Commissioner had no discretion
but had to decline the complaint. The Commissioner in this matter declined
the respondent’s complaint in relation to Dr Kennett on the basis that it lacked
substance and further:
“In my view your complaint is also out of time because I am not persuaded
that continuing not to communicate with a person, in the circumstances as
I understand them, amounts to a series of omissions under the Act, as I
take you to be submitting. You also provide no detail of any specific acts
that would bring your matter within time.”
12. In so finding, the Commissioner was constrained to decline the complaint. AustLII AustLI
Once she had done this the respondent then, exercising his statutory right,
referred the matter to the Tribunal. It was not entirely legislatively clear
whether the Tribunal was as constrained as the Commissioner should the
conduct be found to be out of time as set out in Section 81(2)(c). That now
has no significance.
13. In the amended legislation the principles set out in Section 81 are now
encapsulated in Division 4.5 of the Human Rights Commission Act 2005.
Section 78(1) gives the Commissioner the discretion to close a complaint if
“more than 2 years have elapsed since the circumstances that gave rise to the
complaint happened”. Section 99 of the Act provides for decisions to be
made by the tribunal following a hearing of a complaint. The tribunal is not
given the power to decline a complaint that is time barred as is contained in
Subsection 78(1). The legislative intent is obviously that the Commissioner is
to have the discretion to decline a complaint that alleges conduct outside the
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! stipulated time frame and, if that discretion is exercised adversely to the
complainant, the matter may be referred to the Tribunal. The Tribunal must
hear the complaint and reach a decision excluding any consideration of the
length of time that has elapsed since the commission of the conduct
complained of.
14. Counsel for the applicants submitted that the Tribunal had the discretion to
decline a complaint where the time from the commission of the acts forming
the basis of the complaint was so remote as to make it unfair to allow the
complaint to continue. That is not a submission upon which I have to rule, in
this matter.
15. The other preliminary point that was before me concerned the nature of the
complaint referred to the Tribunal. Under Section 80 of the Human Rights
Commission Act 2005, which is not significantly different in terms to similar
provisions in the unamended Discrimination Act 1999, where the
Commissioner proposes to close a complaint a written report must be
furnished. That report must contain a statement informing a complainant that Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
he or she may ask the Commission to refer the complaint to the Discrimination
Tribunal. Section 53 of the Act makes it mandatory for the Commission to
refer the complaint to the Tribunal, if requested by the complainant to do so.
In my view, the hearing of a complaint by the Tribunal so referred must be
restricted to the complaint before the Commission. The Tribunal has no
discretion given it under the Act to allow any variation.
16. The Equal Opportunity Tribunal of Western Australia in Kay Chaisty and City
of Perth [2004] WAEOT 3 considered this point and came to a similar
conclusion, in relation to legislation that was not dissimilar to the legislation
applicable in this matter, saying that it lacked jurisdiction to deal with matters
that were not the subject of investigation before the Commissioner.
17. The initial difficulty with this matter was endeavouring to distil exactly what it
was that the respondent’s claim was. In the original claim form dated 29
November 2005, relating to Dr Kennett, it was claimed, as I have previously
said, that she had treated the claimant unfavourably because of his
psychological disability in the area of education. It was claimed that the
Doctor did not respond to attempts at communication and made allegations AustLII AustLI
against the complainant “as gossip to other academics and to students, never
retracting them”. It was said that these were continuing discriminatory
actions. He indicated that the unfavourable treatment made him “unwelcome
in the local, national (and international) philosophical community” and
indicated that to resolve his complaint, “I would like Jeanette Kennett to have
whatever she wants from me (presumably, nothing ever again) but in such a
way that my vocational and social preferences are not eternally undermined”.
18. In the Chaisty matter, the Tribunal had to consider what it was that comprised
the complaint before the Commissioner and said:
“The complaint referred to in Section 107(3) of the Act is the complaint into
which the Commissioner enquired: Section 84 of the Act. The complaint is
not only the initial complaint but also the complaints made by the
complainant during the course of the Commissioner’s investigation.”
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
19. The complaints concerning Dr Kennett as investigated by the Commissioner
are set out in her letter of 1 May 2006 to the respondent and have obviously
been distilled from the original complaint form and further correspondence
between the Commissioner and him. In that the Commissioner says:
“In your complaint form you tell me Dr Kennett has treated you
unfavourably by not responding to your attempts at communication, and by
ostracising you because of your psychological disability. You also tell me
Dr Kennett “makes allegations against (you) not as formal
complaints…but as gossip to other academics and to students…”. You say
you first met Dr Kennett in 1990 when you were at Monash University
studying for an Arts degree majoring in Philosophy, and she was your
tutor in first semester of 1990. You also say “Jeanette Kennett (and
Monash) became aware that (you) suffered depression around February
1995”. You alleged Jeanette Kennett took part in the making of a group-
discussion in early 1995 by the philosophy lecturers at Monash University
to ostracise you indefinitely, and that decision is in place today. Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
You claim another reason for Dr Kennett’s alleged ostracism is “because
of (discrimination) complaints (you) were making against her colleagues”.
You say the “relevant (proposed or actual) complaints” on which you case
your victimisation complaint “are against the A.N.U (especially against
the A.N.U philosophers: Frank Jackson, Michael Smith, Philip Pettit, Rae
Langton, and so on), and against Monash University (especially against
the Monash philosophers: John Bigelow, Jeanette Kennett, Rae Langston,
and so on)”. I understand you are also claiming “misleading allegations”
against you also continue victimisation.
You tell me the effect of the alleged unfavourable treatment is that you are
“unwelcome in the local, national (and international) philosophical
community”. You also tell me that you “cannot help feeling that eternal
ostracism is unreasonable and excessive”.
20. Similarly, the complaints concerning Dr Laugesen are set out by the
Commissioner as:
AustLII AustLI
In your complaint form you tell me Dr Laugesen has treated you
unfavourably by not giving you “enough reasonable consideration to
(your) disability in her dealings with (you)…(and) contributed to (your)
sense of ostracism by creasing to communicate with (you.)” You also tell
me Dr Laugesen “stopped communicating with (you) because you lodged a
complaint with the ANU Equity and Diversity Unit in July 2002 against
(your) co-workers, including (Dr Laugesen)”. You tell me “Deborah White
(ANU Human resources) seems to have advised the Dictionary people
((your) former co-workers) not to ‘engage’ with (you) (2002) sometime)
(and you) never heard from Amanda ever again (well, hardly ever, and it
wasn’t the same).”
You tell me the effect of the alleged unfavourable treatment is that you
“lost Amanda” and this loss “is the most hurtful”.
21. +LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! The respondent filed a document with the Tribunal in response to the
Directions given by Deputy President Peedom on 6 December 2006. This
document is dated 15 January 2007 and filed on 16 January 2007. The
applicants filed a revised application to strike out the respondent’s complaint
in each matter and the respondent filed an answer to that application on 13
February 2007. He filed a document, being submissions to the Tribunal on
the hearing of these applications.
22. Given the content of those documents and cognisant of the High Court’s
observations in Neil –v- Nott and another (1994) 121 ALR 148 at 150 where it
said in a joint judgment:
“A frequent consequence of self-representation is that the Court must
assume the burden of attempting to ascertain the rights of parties which
are obfuscated by their own advocacy”
I sought to have the respondent express with clarity and brevity what it wa s
that he was complaining of. In so far as the complaint against Dr Kennett was Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
concerned, he said that he alleged that she ostracised him and spoke ill of him
to others within the Australian National University, because of his
psychological disability and this led to the University declining to accept his
application for readmission as a student in December of 1996.
23. In so far as the complaint against Dr Laugesen is concerned, the respondent
again alleged that she had ostracised him and spoke ill of him to others within
the Australian National University, because of his psychological disability and
this led to the University to decline to continue to employ him.
24. In each case the respondent alleged that the applicant had aided and abetted the
University by her conduct and, as I understand the submission, this conduct of
the University amounted to unfavourable treatment as set out in the definition
of discrimination within Section 8 of the Act. This is not something that he
had directly asserted previously, although, he submitted it could be gleaned
from his filed documentation.
25. Section 73 of the Discrimination Act 1991 provides: AustLII AustLI
“A person who aids, abets, counsels or procures someone else to do an act
that is unlawful under part 3, part 5, Section 66 or part 7 is taken, for this
Act, also to have done the Act.”
Unlawful discrimination is contained in part 3 of the Act.
26. Counsel for the applicants submitted that I shouldn’t allow the respondent to
put his case in this way before the Tribunal as it was not the complaint referred
to it by the Commissioner. I am of the view that I should allow it to be so put.
I do so on the basis that it can be seen from the correspondence contained in
the “T” documents that an inference can be drawn that the respondent was
alleging this, particularly when the filed chronology is examined.
27. There is no definition within the Act of the words “aid, abet, counsel or
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! procure”. I am of the view that the words should be given their ordinary
meanings and not have attached to them legislative definition found in other
Territory legislation. The elements of aiding and abetting were succinctly
stated by Hunt CJ at CL in Holloway –v- Gilport Pty Ltd (1995) 79 A Crim R
76 at 89:
“In Giorgiannni (1985) 156 CLR……it was held by the High Court that, in
order to establish that one person is an accessory to the commission of an
offence by another person by aiding and abetting him, the prosecution
must establish:
i. the commission of that offence by the principal offender, and
ii. that the accused was present at the time when the offence was
committed, and
iii. that (subject to an exception which is immaterial here) the
accused knew all the essential facts or circumstances which must
be established by the prosecution in order to show that the offence
was committed by the principal offender (whether or not the
accused knew that they amounted to an offence), and Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
iv. that, with that knowledge, he intentionally assisted or encouraged
the principal offender to commit that offence. The accessory’s
intention to assist or encourage the principal offender must be
based upon that knowledge.”
28. On the hearing of an application under Section 79 of the Discrimination Act
1991 the principles to be applied are set out by Deputy President Peedom in
the matter of Firestone and Legal Aid Office (ACT) [2006] ACTDT 3:
10. In determining whether a complaint should be struck out pursuant to
Section 89 of the Act, the Tribunal ordinarily accepts that it should be
assumed that the factual allegations relied upon by the complainant are
true and such inferences in favour of the complainant as are open should
be drawn. If, however, it is clear beyond doubt that the complainant has
no arguable case which should be allowed to be resolved at a full hearing,
a complaint may be dismissed as lacking in substance (see State Electricity
Commission v Rabel & Ors [1997] EOC 92/875).
tl. AustLll AustLII AUStr
AustLII AustLI
11. The power to dismiss a claim as without substance is required to be
exercised with considerable caution.(see Clean Ocean Foundation v
Environment Protection Authority (2003) VAR 227 at 230-231. See also
Lucy Couper and ACT Housing DT03/18 dated 22 June 2004)”
29. Allowing that the facts alleged by the respondent are true, viz that each
applicant ostracised the respondent and spoke in a non favourable way
concerning him to others employed by the Australian National University and
that the University refused to allow him to re-enrol in a course and that he was
refused employment, I am asked to draw an inference from the evidence
before me. The inference being that the decision of the University was taken
in each matter with each applicant aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring
the University to do so. Further, I am asked to infer that the conduct of the
University in refusing to re-enrol the respondent or employ him was because
of his psychological disability. It is clear from the evidence, that with some
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! justification, there is an inference to be drawn that the conduct of the
applicants was symptomatic of interpersonal grievances between the parties.
30. The distinction between conjecture and inference is often difficult to draw as
was said by Lord McMillan in Jones v Great Western Railway Co [1930] 144
LT 194:
“The dividing line between conjecture and inference is often a very
difficult one to draw. A conjecture may be plausible, but is of no
legal value, for its essence is that it is a mere guess. An inference in
the legal sense, on the other hand, is a deduction from the evidence,
and if it is a reasonable deduction it may have the validity of legal
proof.”
31. In order for the inference to be drawn, as requested by the respondent in each
matter, there must be credible evidence from which it might be so drawn. The
respondent submitted that Dr Kennett has engaged in conduct that has aided,
abetted or counselled the Australian National University in it’s decision not to
allow him to re-enrol in a Ph.D course in December 1996 and that this
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
continues. It is alleged that this amounted to discrimination against him on
the basis of his psychological condition. There was no evidence put before the
Commission or the tribunal of this condition. I am prepared to accept that the
respondent suffers from some psychological condition.
32. There is evidence that Dr Kennett was not in the Australian Capital Territory
in 1995 when the respondent was refused permission to re-enrol. It was
submitted that the applicant could not have aided and abetted or be guilty in
some way “accessorially” in the conduct of the University as she was not
within the jurisdiction. In my view it is not necessary to grapple with this
concept. What the applicant asks is that I draw an inference that he was
declined re-enrolment because of his psychological disability. As I have said,
to draw an inference there must be proven evidence. There is absolutely no
evidence that the University declined the applicant’s application because of his
psychological condition or indeed that it continues to do so because of this.
The applicant submitted that this evidence was in the hands of the University
and given an opportunity he would seek to rely upon it at a hearing of his
complaints. The respondent has been given an opportunity to produce the AustLII AustLI
evidence upon which he grounds his complaint and directions to this effect
were given by Deputy President Peedom. That evidence discloses nothing
from which that inference could be drawn.
33. Further, there is no evidence from which an inference could be drawn that the
University generally or, more specifically, the decision maker was aware of
the fact that the applicant had “ostracised” the respondent or knew of the
content of conversations concerning him. Even if there was such evidence it
would be necessary to show that he acted on those facts in declining the
application for re-enrolment.
34. I am of the view that the respondent in his complaint against Dr Kennett, of
engaging in conduct that was and continues to be unfavourable towards him
because of his psychological disability, has “no arguable case which should
be allowed to be resolved at a full hearing”.
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
35. The respondent alleged at the hearing that Dr Laugesen had ostracised him and
spoke ill of him to others within the Australian National University and
thereby in some way aided, abetted or counselled the University in declining to
renew a contract of employment with him. The respondent pointed to a date in
2001 when he said that he had been “bullied” by an employee of the
University and in November of that year left his employment briefly, finally
ceasing employment in late 2002.
36. This complaint against Dr Laugesen must suffer the same fate as that relating
to Dr Kennett. There is no evidence of any nexus between the conduct of Dr
Laugesen, even taking it at its highest and accepting the truth of the allegation,
and the decision of an employee of the Australian National University not to
renew the respondent’s contract of employment.
37. The respondent has alleged that the discrimination against him was in the area
of employment. As I understand it, this is an allegation that the Australian
National University has discriminated against the respondent “in deciding who Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
should be offered employment” (s10(1)(b) Discrimination Act 1991) and that
as a result of her conduct in ostracising him and speaking ill of him to others
because of his psychological disability this has aided, abetted or counselled the
University in so acting. It is alleged that the University continues in its
conduct, in declining to employ the respondent.
38. I note that Dr Laugesen took up employment with the University of Southern
Queensland at the beginning of February 2004.
39. Adopting the submission of Counsel for Dr Laugesen:
“As Justice Connolly pointed out in Davies v Hawthorn [2004]
ACTSC 119 (22 November 2004) at paragraph 7,well established
principles about strike out are that:
“the applicant will succeed only if they establish that, even
on the version of facts pleaded by a plaintiff, the substantive
action ‘discloses a case which the court is satisfied cannot
AustLII AustLI succeed’ (per Barwick CJ), General Steel Industries Inc v
Commissioner for Railways (NSW) (1964) 112 CLR 125 at
129).”
I am of the view that the respondent cannot succeed in his complaint against Dr
Laugesen.
40. The respondent has, in his complaint, alleged victimisation against both Dr
Kennett and Dr Laugesen “because I made or supported a discrimination
complaint”. Section 68 of the Discrimination Act 1991 forbids the unlawful
act of victimisation and provides:
“(1) It is unlawful for a person (the first person) to subject someone
else (the other person) to any detriment because-
(a) the other person has –
(i) begun a proceeding under this Act; or
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! (ii) given evidence, or produced a document or
thing, to the tribunal; or
(iii) reasonably asserted any rights that a person
(including the other person) has under this Act;
or
(iv) claimed that a person has committed an act that
is unlawful under this Act; or
(b) the first person believes that the other person proposes
to do something mentioned in paragraph (a).
(2) Subsection (1)(a)(iv) does not apply in relation to a claim that
is false and is not made honestly.”
41. The respondent has alleged that Dr Kennett has, in early 1995, made a decision
with others to ostracise him and continues with that conduct to this day. He
claims that one such reason for this is that he made “discrimination
complaints” against her colleagues.
42. In so far as Dr Laugesen is concerned, the respondent alleged that the Dr
“stopped communicating with me because I lodged a complaint with the ANU Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Equity and Diversity Unit in July 2002”. During submissions it became clear
that the respondent had commenced proceedings under this Act sometime in
2003. That matter is presently part heard before the Tribunal President. He
also commenced proceedings under the Act in November 2005, an
interlocutory proceeding being before Deputy President Peedom in which he
delivered judgment on 26 February 2007.
43. The allegation of victimisation against both Dr Kennett and Dr Laugesen must
fail. Any decision that either Dr took to, personally or in a group, ostracise the
respondent is not conduct that is prohibited by the Act. There is no evidence
that any such decision was taken to bring it within the purview of Section 10
of the Act.
44. In the circumstances, for the reasons set out, I am satisfied that the applicant in
each case has met her onus of proof and I therefore order that each complaint
be struck out on the ground that it lacks substance.
AustLII AustLI
I certify that this and the 11 preceding
pages are a true copy of the decision
and reasons for decision herein of
Mr G C Lalor, Deputy President.
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Ms M Mulquiney, Associate
Dated: 27 June 2007
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY istLI AustLII AustLI
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL AustLII Au>
APPEARANCE DETAILS
FILE NO: DT 393 & 394 of 2006
COMPLAINANT: MICHAEL FIRESTONE
RESPONDENTS: DR AMANDA LAUGESEN
DR JENETTE KENNETT
COUNSEL APPEARING: COMPLAINANT:
RESPONDENT:
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust
SOLICITORS: COMPLAINANT:
RESPONDENT: MS MARGOT BROWN,
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
LEGAL OFFICE
OTHER: COMPLAINANT:
RESPONDENT:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER: MR G C LALOR, DEPUTY PRESIDENT
DATE OF HEARING: 21 June 2007 PLACE: CANBERRA
DATE OF DECISION: 27 June 2007 PLACE: CANBERRA
COMMENT:
Must!Il Aust!Il AustLI AustLi
stl AustLll AustLll AustL