ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
THE OWNERS – UNITS PLAN 2881 v STOJANOVIC & ANOR
[2020] ACAT 113
XD 171/2020
Catchwords: CIVIL DISPUTE – unpaid levies – claim for expenses under
section 31 of the Unit Titles (Management) Act 2011 –
adjournment refused – failure to comply with tribunal directions
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! – hearing on evidence already filed – counterclaim seeking
recovery of payment subject to consent orders – no application
made to set aside consent orders – unreasonable delay and
reasonable costs
Legislation cited: ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act ss 48, 56
Unit Titles (Management) Act 2011 s 31, 103
Subordinate
Legislation cited: ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Procedures Rules
2020 r 71
Cases cited: Burrell v The Queen (2008) 238 CLR 218
CIC Australia Ltd v Australian Capital Territory Planning
and Land Authority [2013] ACTSC 96
Tribunal: Senior Member K Katavic
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Date of Orders: 17 December 2020
Date of Reasons for Decision: 17 December 2020
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL XD 171/2020
BETWEEN:
THE OWNERS – UNITS PLAN 2881
Applicant
AND:
WILLIAM VOJISLAV STOJANOVIC
First Respondent
MILICA STOJANOVIC
Second Respondent
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
TRIBUNAL: Senior Member K Katavic
DATE: 17 December 2020
ORDER
The Tribunal orders that:
1. The respondents pay to the applicant the sum of $1,594.95 comprising:
(a) $495 for expenses under section 31 of the UTM Act;
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
(b) $780.95 interest at the rate of 10% incurred up to 23 June 2020; and
(c) $319 for the ACAT filing fee.
2. The respondents’ counterclaim is dismissed.
3. The respondents’ claim for costs is refused.
………………………………..
Senior Member K Katavic
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. The respondents in this matter are the owners of a unit in Phillip, ACT. The
dispute before the Tribunal began as a debt recovery matter for unpaid levies
and expenses under section 31 of the Unit Titles (Management) Act 2011 (UTM
Act). There is some history between the parties which previously brought them
before the tribunal in 2015. The respondents lodged a counterclaim the
substance of which related to these earlier proceedings.
Background
2. On 10 February 2020, the applicant commenced proceedings seeking payment
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! from the respondents as follows:
(a) $2,061.47 unpaid levies.
(b) $737.73 interest at the rate of 10%.
(c) $3,483.51 expenses pursuant to section 31 of the UTM Act.
(d) $319 ACAT filing fee.
3. The respondents filed a response admitting part of the claim, disputing some
amounts claimed and made a counterclaim. The respondents later amended their
counterclaim to reflect the amount owed to them by the applicant according to
their claim and the levies being paid.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
4. On 3 June 2020, the tribunal held a preliminary conference in this matter. The
matter did not resolve and was adjourned for a further preliminary conference
on 16 July 2020. The tribunal also ordered the applicant give to the tribunal and
the respondents by 24 June 2020 the following documents:
(a) Documents pertaining to Clean Away and grease trap charges and any
rules\contracts the applicant is relying upon.
(b) Documentation in relation to insurance excess and any rules\contracts
relied upon by the applicant to charge this.
(c) All arrears and debt notices alleged to have been served on the
respondents.
(d) Documentation pertaining to the bin cleaning charges and any
rules\agreements between the parties in relation to these.
5. The respondents were also required to give to the tribunal and the applicant by
24 June 2020 any further evidence they wish to rely upon in relation to the
plumbing charges.
6. The applicant did not comply with those orders. The respondents did.
7. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! The preliminary conference listed for 16 July 2020 did not proceed. The tribunal
made orders as follows:
Noting that the applicant is not ready to proceed and that the respondents
allege the adjournment has cost them income, the Tribunal orders:
1. The matter is adjourned to Monday, 3 August 2020 at 10:30 AM.
2. The respondent’s loss of income for the day (estimated at $1,500.00)
is to be considered in any future hearing or conference settlement.
8. The respondents maintained their claim for costs of $1,500 for income lost due
to the conference being adjourned.
9. At the hearing the respondents confirmed that in relation to the counterclaim
they sought payment from the applicant as follows:
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
(a) $3,325 reimbursement for charges associated with the grease trap.
(b) $490 for unnecessary camera diagnostics undertaken on the grease trap
charged to the respondents.
(c) $671 incurred by the respondents on 1 April 2016 for additional cleaning
and diagnostics of the grease trap.
(d) $924 for bin room charges (not previously reimbursed by the applicant).
10. The claims for $3,325 and $924 were the subject of consent orders made in
proceedings in this tribunal on 15 February 2015 (the Consent Orders). The
other amounts claimed are related to issues associated with those Consent
Orders.
11. In their submission dated 21 October 2020, the respondents referred to an
amount of $574.20 for camera diagnostics for the grease trap which was
incurred on 12 October 2020. This amount was not included in the counterclaim
or amended counterclaim. I do not regard it as properly before the Tribunal for
consideration.
12. At the commencement of the hearing, the applicant’s legal representative
requested an adjournment. The respondents opposed the request. Essentially, the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! applicant’s representative was not prepared for the hearing, had not amended
the application, and had not complied with the directions made on 9 September
2020 in preparation for the hearing. The respondents had complied with the
directions and were ready to proceed. In the circumstances, I refused the
applicant’s request and gave brief oral reasons at the hearing. I proceeded to
hear the matter based on the material that had been lodged by the parties up to
that date.
13. The documents before the Tribunal were as follows:
(a) Application dated 7 February 2020.
(b) Response and counterclaim dated 17 March 2020 including four
attachments.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
(c) Documents submitted by the respondents on 24 June 2020.
(d) Amended counterclaim dated 21 July 2020.
(e) Documents submitted by the applicant on 3 August 2020.
(f) Submissions and further material lodged by the applicant on 7 September
2020 and email correspondence between the parties on 8 September 2020.
(g) Submissions and further documents submitted by the respondents on
21 October 2020.
The debt claim
14. By 23 June 2020, being prior to the hearing, the respondents had paid in full the
outstanding levies the subject of the application, and some expenses as claimed
under section 31 of the UTM Act. Some of the claimed expenses remained the
subject of dispute. The Tribunal was required to decide whether those expenses
were reasonable and reasonably incurred for the purposes of considering the
amount to be awarded in favour of the applicant based on the evidence before it.
15. The respondents submitted that if the applicant could produce the arrears notices
sent on 27 February 2017, 18 April 2017, 26 June 2019 and 12 December 2019
for which a claim of $55 for each was made pursuant to section 31, then they
would not dispute the claimed expense. The applicant was not able to produce
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! the arrears notices in support of its claim and therefore the Tribunal does, not in
the circumstances, regard the claim for those notices to be reasonably incurred.
The respondents disputed they had received these notices and took the not
unreasonable step of putting the applicant to proof in respect of each as claimed.
The applicant was not able to do so and therefore the Tribunal does not allow
those expenses.
16. The respondents also disputed the amount of $500 charged on 8 December 2017
for insurance excess.
17. The parties agree that on or about 17 November 2017, there was an incident in
which the window to the façade of the respondents unit was broken. There was
some debate about whether this was an attempted break-in or other unsolicited Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
damage to the property. It was not reported to police. The glass was repaired at
a cost of $712.80 and a claim was made by the applicant to its insurer.
18. The Owners Corporation Rules for Units Plan 2881 at clause 3(3) state that
when a claim against the corporation’s building insurance policy in respect of
damage to a unit title building property is accepted, section 103(1) of the UTM
Act requires the insurance money to be applied to rebuilding and reinstating the
building. The value of any excess applied by the insurer on any claim will be
recoverable by the Corporation as a debt from the unit owner except where the
damage to the building results from a wilful or negligent act or omission of the
Owners Corporation or another unit owner.
19. The applicant claimed that the insurance excess of $500 was therefore
recoverable from the respondents as a debt. Again, the respondents put the
applicant to proof that an excess had been applied for that amount.
20. On 3 June 2020, amongst other things the tribunal ordered the applicant to
provide by 24 June 2020 documentation in relation to the insurance excess and
any rules contracts relied upon by the applicant to charge this. As noted above,
the applicant did not comply with those orders but on 3 August 2020 submitted
some further documentation. Amongst that documentation was an email
exchange between the building and strata managers on 31 January 2018, the
insurance claim form, and the invoice for the glass repairs.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
21. No evidence was before the Tribunal that supported the applicant being charged
an excess of $500 because of the incident in November 2017. In the absence of
any proof before the Tribunal in support of the expense, the Tribunal is not
satisfied that the amount of $500 has been reasonably incurred by the applicant
and therefore does not allow that expense.
22. The respondents also disputed expenses which may be characterised as legal
costs associated with recovering the debt owed by the respondents. These were
expenses incurred as follows:
(a) $44 incurred on 25 July 2019 for advice and other correspondence relating
to the respondents request to arrange an instalment regime.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
(b) $55 incurred on 11 December 2019 for phone calls and emails
correspondence regarding the outstanding debt.
(c) $396 incurred on 7 February 2020 to commence the Tribunal proceedings
to recover the debt.
23. The respondents believed that they had in place an instalment regime which had
been accepted by the applicant to pay $100 per week off the outstanding
amount. The applicant submitted that no formal arrangement had been made
and that the respondents had adopted the practice of paying $100 a week off the
debt. The applicant submitted that it regarded the arrangement as temporary due
to financial and health issues experienced by the respondents. The applicant
explained that by December 2019 the respondents’ situation had not changed
and as there was no formal agreement in place the repayment situation was no
longer going to be tolerated by the applicant. As a result, it instructed its legal
representatives to proceed with recovery action.
24. Against that, the respondents submitted that it was not necessary for the
applicant to engage the services of a debt collector or commence proceedings
because the instalment regime had been accepted and was appropriate. They
submitted any legal costs associated with commencing proceedings in the
Tribunal and engaging debt collection services were not reasonably incurred.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
25. I do not accept the respondents’ submission that the amounts claimed are not
reasonable. In circumstances where the respondents had unilaterally decided
paying $100 per week off the debt was acceptable it was not unreasonable for
the applicant to engage the services of a debt collector and commence
proceedings in this tribunal. While the respondents reasonably believed the
repayment arrangement was acceptable it was not formalised. They continued to
comply with that arrangement assuming the arrangement was suitable.
However, the consideration under section 31 does not require the Tribunal to
consider whether the respondents’ behaviour or belief was reasonable but
whether the expenses claimed by the applicant in the circumstances were
reasonably incurred. In the Tribunal’s view they were consistent with the
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
applicant’s obligation to recover any outstanding monies owed therefore the
Tribunal and awards those amounts as claimed. There is necessarily a cost
involved in coming to the tribunal to seek relief which falls within section 31 of
the UTM Act.
26. For these reasons, I order the respondents pay to the applicant the sum of
$1,594.95 comprising:
(a) $495 for expenses under section 31 of the UTM Act set out above at [22];
(b) $780.95 for outstanding interest at the rate of 10% incurred up to 23 June
2020; and
(c) $319 for the ACAT filing fee.
Counterclaim
27. The respondents’ counterclaim seeks payment from the applicant for the
following:
(a) $3,325 for the cost of clearance and inspection of the drain blockage as
per the Consent Orders.
(b) $490 for camera diagnostics of the grease trap charged to the respondents
on 31 July 2013.
(c) +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! $671 for the cost of cleaning and diagnosis of blocked drains on 1 April
2016.
(d) $924 for bin room charges not refunded to them.
(e) $1,500 for lost income referred to above.
28. The respondents’ claim did not specifically apply to set aside the Consent
Orders.
The monetary claim regarding blocked drains
29. The respondents claimed they should not have had to pay to the applicant
$3,325 and $490 in charges for clearing and inspecting the grease trap drains.
They also seek to recover $671 from the applicant being the costs of clearing a
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
blocked drain on 1 April 2016. This amounts to a claim for $4,486.
30. The respondents submitted the Consent Orders were signed under duress and
based on false or misleading information. The respondents say the applicant
convinced them to agree to the terms of the Consent Orders and amended the
Owners Corporation Rules regarding responsibility for cleaning the grease traps
because the applicant knew there was a fault in the construction of the drains for
which it was liable. The respondents told the Tribunal they felt pressured into
agreeing to the Consent Orders, did not understand what was going on and had
no option to obtain independent legal advice at the time. They conceded they
had not taken any steps in the intervening five-year period to appeal or set aside
the Consent Orders.
31. The applicant submitted that there was no basis to set aside the Consent Orders
as there was no application before the Tribunal of that kind. The applicant
further submitted that the respondents were not entitled to an order requiring the
applicant to pay $3,325 because that payment was subject to Consent Orders.
32. I accept the applicant’s submissions. There is no application before the Tribunal
seeking to set aside the Consent Orders. Having regard to the terms of the
Consent Orders I am not satisfied the respondents are entitled to payment of
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! $3,325 from the applicant. Even if the respondents had properly sought to set
aside the Consent Orders I would have declined to do so.
33. Finality of judgments is a central principle of the judicial system. Once
controversies are resolved, they are not to be reopened except in a few, narrowly
defined, circumstances.1 Such circumstances are found in rules governing the
reopening of final orders after they have been formally recorded. Any challenge
to final orders may also be the subject of appeal. In relation to consent orders,
rule 71(6) of the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Procedures Rules 2020
specifically sets out the matters the Tribunal may take into account in
considering whether to set aside a final order made by consent.
34. There are several difficulties with the respondents’ submission.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
35. The respondents allege the applicant amended the relevant Owners Corporation
Rules which resulted in the commercial units being responsible for the cost of
cleaning and removal of liquid and solid waste discharged by the grease
drainage line to grease traps provided for the exclusive use the commercial units
knowing there was a fault in the drain.2 There is no evidence before the Tribunal
that supports such an assertion.
1 Burrell v The Queen (2008) 238 CLR 218, 223 [15] per Gummow ACJ, Hayne J, Heydon J,
Crennan J and Kiefel J
2 The Consent Orders included declarations that these amendments were valid and took effect on
the various nominated dates
36. On 1 April 2016 the respondents engaged the services of Duncan’s Plumbing,
Heating and Air-conditioning Pty Ltd to fix a blocked drain.3 The respondents
claim that the plumbers findings demonstrate problems with the drain that
needed to be rectified which the applicant either did know about or ought to
have known about. The invoice dated 1 April 2016 records the following:
Drain is badly hung in this section and has dodgy connections that
someone has installed that need to be cut out and replaced.
37. I am not satisfied that the invoice from Duncan’s Plumbing, Heating and Air-
conditioning is sufficient to demonstrate the existence of a problem or one that
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! the applicant was aware of or could have been aware of prior to amending the
Owners Corporation Rules or entering the Consent Orders. Further, had the
respondents genuinely believed this to be the case it was open to them at the
time to take steps to seek to have the Consent Orders set aside or take any other
action they considered appropriate. They did not do so and to raise the issue in
these proceedings some five years later is contrary to the principles of finality in
litigation.
38. I am also not satisfied the respondents are entitled to recover the amount of
$671 from the applicant, being the Duncan’s Plumbing, Heating and Air-
conditioning invoice. As a consequence of both the amendments to the Owners
Corporation Rules and the Consent Orders this was an expense in relation to the
drains which was the responsibility of the respondents. I make the same Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
conclusion in relation to the respondents’ claim for payment of $490 for camera
diagnostics on the grease trap.
39. The respondents also claimed they agreed to the Consent Orders under duress.
They claimed that they felt intimidated by the applicant having lawyers attend
the mediation or conference in the Tribunal. They were under the impression the
Consent Orders were the only option they had. They were anxious that the
process had taken them away from the restaurant they were operating at the time
and were mindful of getting back to the business without further delay and
3 Duncan’s Plumbing, Heating and Air-conditioning Pty Ltd invoice dated 1 April 2016 filed by
the respondents on 17 March 2020 with the Response
hence signed the orders. I am not satisfied that the circumstances advanced by
the respondents qualifies as duress. Again, there is insufficient evidence before
the Tribunal about the nature of the proceedings and the conduct of the parties
at the time to persuade me that the Consent Orders should be set aside. Making
such a claim five years later is inevitably fraught with difficulty.
40. The respondents’ claim for $4,486 is dismissed.
The bin room charges
41. The respondents claimed they were to be reimbursed $924 by the applicant in
relation to bin room charges. They claimed this did not happen. The applicant
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! submits on 1 May 2015 the amount of $1,122 was credited to the respondents
account. This was more than what was required of the applicant. It was a
component of the amount of $5,291.11 credited to the respondents on that date.
It is reflected in a spreadsheet relied upon by the applicant.4
42. On 24 June 2020, the respondents lodged a statement of account for the period
1 January 2014 and 30 April 2015. The amount referred to by the applicant
would have appeared on the following statement. This has not been provided to
the Tribunal. The respondents rejected the applicant’s spreadsheet on the basis
that “any individual can manufacture invoices and spreadsheets – we require
actual proof”.5
43. I have no reason to doubt the correctness of the spreadsheet relied upon by the
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
applicant or find that it has been ‘manufactured’. Had the respondents genuinely
claimed the credit of $5,291.11 was not applied to their account on 1 May 2015
inclusive of the $924 for the bin room charges then the statement of account for
the period commencing 1 May 2015 might have been provided. I am satisfied
on the evidence available that the amount of $1,122 was credited to the
respondents on 1 May 2015 in respect of the bin room charges. The
respondents’ claim for $924 is dismissed.
The respondents’ costs
4 Applicant’s submissions and material lodged on 7 September 2020
5 Email from the first respondent to Mr Ecob dated 7 September 2020
44. The respondents operate business selling produce at market stalls in NSW and
the ACT. They submitted that they attend these markets on fixed scheduled
days. On 16 July 2020, they claim they were scheduled to attend a market in
Double Bay, NSW. They claim they did not attend those markets because of
their required attendance at the preliminary conference on that day.
45. Having regard to the orders made by the Tribunal on 16 July 2020, it is apparent
that the conference did not proceed because of a lack of preparedness on the
applicant’s part. Essentially what the respondents claim are costs thrown away
by reason of the applicant’s failure or unpreparedness to proceed on that date.
46. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! The respondents maintained their claim for costs at the hearing and in support of
the amount claimed they relied upon three transaction records for income
received at the Double Bay markets on 2 July 2020 for $1,244, 9 July 2020 for
$1,427, and 23 July 2020 for $1,948. They submitted that these amounts
reflected a range of income they reasonably expected to receive had they
attended the Double Bay markets on 16 July 2020 which is consistent with the
amount of $1,500 claimed.
47. The applicant’s opposed the claim for costs on the basis that the respondents did
not incur any costs thrown away by reason of the conference not proceeding as
listed. The applicant claimed the conference was only listed for half an hour and
was to be conducted by telephone. The applicant further submitted, the
respondents made a personal decision not to attend the Double Bay markets in Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
circumstances where their attendance was only required by telephone which
could have been facilitated from Double Bay taking only half an hour of their
time away from the stall. The applicant submitted the respondents could have
attended the Double Bay markets and participated in the conference by phone.
The applicant also submitted that the respondents would have been taken away
from any activity to participate in the conference whether the matter settled or
not. Even if the conference proceeded but did not settle, would the applicant still
be required to cover lost income for a full day?
48. The Tribunal’s powers in relation to costs are governed by section 48 of the
ACAT Act. Section 48(1) provides:
Costs of proceedings
(1) The parties to an application must bear their own costs unless this
Act otherwise provides or the tribunal otherwise orders.
(2) However—
(a) if the tribunal decides an application in favour of the
applicant, the tribunal may order the other party to pay the
applicant––
(i) the filing fee for the application; and
(ii) any other fee incurred by the applicant that the tribunal
considers necessary for the application; or
Examples––subpar (ii)
 a fee for a business name or company search
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!  a filing fee for a subpoena
 hearing fees
(b) if the tribunal considers that a party to an application caused
unreasonable delay or obstruction before or while the tribunal
was dealing with the application—the tribunal may order the
party to pay the reasonable costs of the other party arising
from the delay or obstruction; or
(c) subject to section 49, if a party to the application contravenes
an order of the tribunal—the tribunal may order the party to
pay the costs or part of the costs of the application to the other
party; or
(d) if the application is an application for review of a decision
under the Heritage Act 2004, the Planning and Development
Act 2007 or the Tree Protection Act 2005, and the tribunal
makes an order under section 32 (2) (Dismissing or striking
out applications)—the tribunal may order the applicant to pay
the reasonable costs of the other party arising from the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
application.
Note A legal expense relating to a proceeding in the tribunal may be
recoverable as a debt under the Unit Titles (Management) Act 2011,
s 31.
(3) For subsection (2) (d), reasonable costs of the other party arising
from the application include reasonable legal costs but do not
include holding costs.
Examples—holding costs
 interest and lender imposed charges associated with a loan
 costs of engaging workers and subcontractors and hiring equipment
for a development
49. Subsection (2)(a), (c) and (d) and subsection (3) of section 48 do not apply in
the circumstances of this case, and the Tribunal’s discretionary power under
subsection (1) is limited. That limitation was considered in CIC Australia Ltd v
Australian Capital Territory Planning and Land Authority, 6 wherein the Court
identified the four main elements of section 48 as:
(a) the default position is that the parties bear their own costs;
(b) the default position may be varied by provisions of the ACAT Act;
(c) the default position may be varied by an order of ACAT;
(d) in four specified circumstances, ACAT may make particular costs
orders. 7
50. Section 48 “confers a narrow power on ACAT ...to make only the orders
specified in section 48(2) and only in the circumstances specified in that
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! provision.”8
51. Applying that interpretation to the circumstances of this matter, the respondents’
application for costs must be dismissed unless it comes within section 48(2)(b).
52. It is regrettable that the conference did not proceed as listed on 16 July 2020. It
is highly undesirable for matters to experience delay in either reaching
settlement early or progressing to hearing if they are unable to be resolved.
Unfortunately, the Tribunal is left with the impression that the applicant’s
representatives were generally inattentive or unprepared in respect of this matter
given the requested adjournment at the commencement of the hearing for
reasons similar to those recorded by the tribunal on 16 July 2020. The
circumstances in which the conference was then adjourned to a further date
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
qualifies as delay for the purposes of section 48(2)(b). This was the second
conference scheduled in this matter following an earlier conference on 3 June
2020 which resulted in the applicant being required to give the Tribunal and the
respondents by 24 June 2020 the series of documents set out in those orders.
The applicant did not comply with those orders.
53. In those circumstances, I am satisfied the delay was unreasonable. There was
sufficient time to provide the documents and obtain instructions for the purposes
6 [2013] ACTSC 96
7 CIC Australia Ltd v Australian Capital Territory Planning and Land Authority [2013] ACTSC 96 at
[37]
8 CIC Australia Ltd v Australian Capital Territory Planning and Land Authority [2013] ACTSC 96 at
[82]
of attending on 16 July 2020. Had the applicant complied with the orders of
3 June 2020 and been prepared to proceed with the conference on 16 July 2020
an additional conference may not have been required. The matter may have
resolved and if not, a timetable to prepare the matter for final hearing would
have been set without the need for the parties to attend the Tribunal for a further
conference. Unusually in this matter the conference on 3 August 2020 was
adjourned for further conference on 9 September 2020. It was at this conference
directions were made, and the matter listed for hearing.
54. The Tribunal may exercise the discretion in section 48(2)(b) if there is
unreasonable delay and order the applicant pay the respondents’ reasonable
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! costs arising from the delay. I am not satisfied that the amount of $1,500 is
reasonable. The respondents were only required to attend the conference by
telephone and, had it proceeded, it would have only occupied up to one hour of
their time. The respondents elected not to attend the Double Bay markets in
those circumstances. They submitted that it was not practical for them to attend
the markets and take time out to participate in the conference because of the
paperwork they needed to refer to for the purposes of the conference and both of
them being required to serve customers and participate in the conference. I am
not satisfied that it is as complicated and difficult as the respondents suggest.
55. For these reasons I am not persuaded to exercise the Tribunal’s discretion in
section 48(2)(b).
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Conclusion
56. I am satisfied that the applicant is entitled to an order for payment of some of
the claimed expenses pursuant to section 31 of the UTM Act and not others.
Given that at the time of the hearing the debt the subject of the application was
paid (apart from some outstanding interest) the applicant requested the Tribunal
make orders requiring the respondents to pay the amount claimed, outstanding
interest and any other amounts awarded by the Tribunal with a notation that the
amount of $2,061.47 had been paid. I decline to do so. It is not necessary to
make orders to the effect that the debt was owed. The applicant is only entitled
to an order for the amount that has not been paid, subject to the Tribunal’s
findings in relation to its claimed expenses.
57. The respondents have been wholly unsuccessful in their counterclaim and claim
for costs.
58. The Tribunal orders:
1. The respondents are to pay to the applicant the sum of $1,594.95
comprising:
(a) $495 for expenses under section 31 of the UTM Act;
(b) $780.95 interest at the rate of 10% incurred up to 23 June 2020; and
(c) $319 for the ACAT filing fee.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
2. The respondents’ counterclaim is dismissed.
3. The respondents’ claim for costs is refused.
………………………………..
Senior Member K Katavic
Date(s) of hearing 2 November 2020
Solicitors for the Applicants: Mr S Ecob, CCA Legal
First and Second In person Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Respondent
s: