ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
DAVIS & ANOR v MURDOCH (Residential Tenancies) [2020]
ACAT 106
RT 430/2020
Catchwords: RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES – bringing trivial disputes –
raising unnecessary procedural issues – the undesirability of
reducing social disputes to legal disputes – the need to focus on
the substantial merits of the dispute
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Legislation cited: Residential Tenancies Act 1997 ss 60, standard terms 91, 94
Cases cited: Hadley v Baxendale 9 Ex 341
List of
Texts/Papers cited: Anforth, Christensen and Adkins, Residential Tenancies Law
and Practice in NSW (Federation Press, 7th Ed)
Tribunal: Senior Member A Anforth
Date of Orders: 18 September 2020
Date of Reasons for Decision: 10 December 2020
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) RT 430/2020
BETWEEN:
ROBERT DAVIS & DANIELLE DAVIS
Applicants/Lessors
AND:
MAX MURDOCH
Respondent/Tenant
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
TRIBUNAL: Senior Member A Anforth
DATE: 18 September 2020
ORDER
The Tribunal orders that:
1. The tenant is to pay the lessors the sum of $640 on or before 2 October 2020.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
……………Signed………..
Senior Member A Anforth
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. The applicants are the owners/lessors of a two-bedroom apartment in a strata
complex in Turner which is privately rented.
2. The tenancy commenced on 26 October 2015 for a fixed term of 12 months
after which it became periodic. The rent at that time was $430 per week and the
bond was $1,720. The residential tenancy agreement was in the standard terms
of Schedule 1 Residential Tenancy Act 1997 with no additional terms. The
tenant had permission from the lessor to sub-lease the second bedroom. He sub-
let the second bedroom to an unidentified person.
3. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! In February 2020 a dispute arose between the parties over a rent increase. On
26 February 2020 the issue was resolved by consent order in the tribunal for a
$15 per week increase from 4 May 2020. At the same time and perhaps as a
consequence of the rent increase disputes, the parties entered into a protracted
dispute over issues of repairs and maintenance of the premises.
4. On 20 May 2020 the lessors gave the tenant a 26 week ‘no ground’ notice of
termination under standard term 94 to vacate by 22 November 2020.
5. On 5 June 2020 the tenant served a notice of intention to vacate under standard
term 91(c) to vacate on 23 June 2020 alleging a failure on the part of the lessors
to maintain the premises. The lessors responded denying any breach on their
part and requiring that the tenant give three weeks’ notice.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
6. On 10 June 2020 the lessors lodged an application for termination of the
tenancy agreement. The lessors sought an order that they were not in breach of
the residential tenancy agreement and that the tenant’s notice of intention to
vacate was invalid for failure to provide three weeks’ notice. The lessors also
sought orders for:
(a) a declaration of what constitutes fair wear and tear in the premises and
gardens;
(b) reasonable access to the premises to show prospective new tenants;
(c) an interim order for their access to the premises for an inspection; and
(d) compensation in the sum of $1,963.50 for the time spent by the lessors in
dealing with the dispute, with such further time costs as are incurred in
finalising the dispute in the Tribunal.
7. Annexed to the application were:
(a) a copy of the tenancy agreement;
(b) the ingoing condition report;
(c) the agreement between the parties for sub-letting;
(d) a record of email and SMS communications between the parties spanning
118 pages, mostly concerning allegation and counter allegation over the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
maintenance and access issues; and
(e) a record of the maintenance carried out by the lessors.
8. On 17 June 2020 the tenant filed a statement headed ‘End of tenancy dispute’.
The tenant wrote that a dispute over maintenance and repairs had arisen in early
2020. Part of that dispute concerned the lessors requiring the tenant to fix a
curtain bracket in the second bedroom and a window lock. The tenant had a
tradesman fix the curtain bracket and fixed the lock himself. The lessors were
not satisfied with the quality of either job.
9. The tenant wrote that the maintenance carried out by the lessors was of a poor
standard. The maintenance items concerned were a seal in the oven door,
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
replacement of some chipped tiles in the kitchen and the lock on the main
bathroom door. In addition, the tenant alleged that the lessor failed to repair a
misalignment of the shower door in the ensuite and a window lock did not close
properly. The tenant said that the parties had different ideas on the relevant
standards of repair expected of the lessor and the tenant in their respective
duties.
10. The inference from the tenant’s documents is that the relationship between the
parties had broken down and had become a contest between them over the
enforcement of their competing rights and responsibilities under the tenancy
agreement.
11. On 23 June 2020 the tenant vacated the premises at which time the rent was
paid up to that date, minus $0.14. The lessor found a new tenant at a higher rent
within a week of the tenant vacating.
12. On 24 June 2020 the lessors filed an amended application seeking three weeks
rent in the sum of $1,440 as compensation for the tenant’s abandonment of the
premises. In the alternative the lessors sought orders for:
(a) $548.57 for the time lost in finding a new tenant;
(b) $0.14 for rent arrears;
(c) $480 for time lost in the tenant denying access before he vacated;
(d) +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! $159.50 for the Tribunal lodgement fee.
13. On 25 June 2020 orders were made for the matter to be listed for a preliminary
conference on 17 July 2020 and hearing on 18 September 2020 with a timetable
for filing evidence and submissions. The matter did not settle at the preliminary
conference.
14. On 7 August 2020 the lessors filed their submissions and evidence. The lessors
argued:
(a) the tenant’s notice of intention to vacate was defective and invalid so that
his vacation of the premises on 23 June 2020 constituted an abandonment.
The defects alleged were:
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
(i) the notice nominated the incorrect clause of the standard terms as
the basis for the notice;
(ii) there was in fact no breach by the lessors;
(iii) the notice gave more than two weeks’ notice instead of only two
weeks;
(iv) the notice did not provide particulars of the alleged breaches;
(v) the notice was not in the required form.
(b) the Tribunal should not waive the defects in the notice under section
60(1)(b) Residential Tenancy Act 1997;
(c) They were entitled to compensation for the excessive time, energy and
emotional toll caused by the tenant’s conduct and abandonment.
15. On 28 August 2020 the tenant filed his submissions together with some emails
between the parties. The submissions repeated matters previously raised by the
tenant. The submissions emphasised the aggression in the relationship between
the parties, which the emails evidenced.
16. The matter was heard on 18 September 2020. Both lessors and the tenant
appeared in person. There were no witnesses called. The matter proceeded by
way of a three-way discussion. Both parties reiterated their previous
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! submissions.
17. The Tribunal found that the tenant’s allegations of failure to repair, or more
particularly, to repair to his aesthetic standards, were ‘frivolous’ and ‘trivial’
and as such did not justify a notice of intention to vacate based on any breach by
the lessor. The Tribunal found that the lessors’ allegations against the tenant for
defective repairs were just as trivial.
18. The tenant sought an adjournment to amend his application to seek
compensation for breach of quiet enjoyment by the lessor, which the tenant
could and should have made any time since the proceedings commenced in the
Tribunal. The breaches alleged were the lessors’ insistence that the tenant
remedy his prior repairs to the curtain bracket and window lock, and the lessors
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
seeking access for inspection and to show the premises to a new tenant. There
was no breach of quiet enjoyment in the lessor seeking access in accordance
with the residential tenancy agreement. Any inconvenience caused by any
unjustified notices in relation to the curtain bracket or window lock by the lessor
were so minor as not to warrant any adjournment for any such claim to be made.
19. The Tribunal found that the tenant’s notice of intention to vacate was defective
in that there was no breach by the lessors that justified the notice. The lessors
argued that this invalid notice amounted to a nullity and so the tenant was then
duty bound to give a three week ‘no grounds’ notice which applies to periodic
tenancies. Accordingly, the lessor was entitled to three weeks rent as
compensation. The Tribunal declined to accept this logic. It was always open to
the tenant to give a three-week notice without the need to specify or rely upon
any breach. The fact of asserting a breach in a ‘no ground’ notice does not
invalidate the notice, even if the alleged breach did not occur.
20. If the tenant’s notice were taken in substance to indicate his intention to vacate
the periodic tenancy, then its deficiency is that it gave two weeks and not three
weeks’ notice. The loss to the lessor in the tenant in giving short notice is only
one week. In fact, the tenant’s notice given on 5 June 2020 for vacant
possession on 23 June 2020 gave 17 days and so it was only four days short.
21. The lessor argued that they had been deprived of a ‘right’ to receive the correct
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! notice for which they should be compensated. The Tribunal explained that a
contractual breach per se at best attracts nominal damages. Compensation is
only awarded where the breach produces a financial loss, and then only in the
circumstances set out in the rule in Hadley v Baxendale1 2 The only loss the
.
lessor had suffered was the four days short notice.
22. This short notice did however have a flow on effect for the lessor. It shortened
the time for the lessor to find a new tenant. The lessors could not be certain that
the tenant would in fact vacate on 23 June 2020, at least until the tenant actually
did so. It was always open the tenant to change his mind for whatever reason
and not vacate. The lessors would then have had to pursue an eviction which
could take months. In any event, the point is that the lessor could not safely
enter a new tenancy agreement with a new tenant until such time as the existing Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
tenant actually surrendered vacant possession. The lessors did move
expeditiously and had a new tenant in possession within a week. The tenant did
not co-operate with the lessors in facilitating access for prospective new tenants
to inspect. For these reasons the outer limit of the lessors’ financial loss was one
week of rent and the Tribunal determined to allow the whole of that one week.
23. The lessors insisted that they were entitled to compensation for the emotional
toll the events had taken and for their time committed to the Tribunal
1 9 Ex 341
Press, 7th ed) at [2.187.3]
proceedings. The Tribunal explained that damages for emotional toll are not
recoverable by a lessor against a tenant because:
(a) there is no equivalent of covenant for quiet enjoyment in favour of a
lessor in the standard terms or at common law;
(b) the common law of contract does not permit recovery for damages of this
kind except in the limited class of cases known as the Baltic Shipping
3
cases.
24. The lessors pressed their claim for rent arrears of $0.14. The Tribunal denied the
claim on the bases that the claim was trivial, a waste of public resources and
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! should not have been brought. This sparked a wider dialogue between the
lessors and the Tribunal in which the Tribunal put the view that it should focus
on the substantial merits of a case and not on procedural technicalities (real or
imagined) and trivial proxies for the true dispute. There were issue of public
costs and costs to other parties in raising arguments that were either intended to,
or had the unintended effect of, circumventing the substantial merits of the
dispute.
25. The lessors pressed for the dispute to turn on questions of law as they perceived
them, which the Tribunal eschewed for the following reasons. Firstly, the
Tribunal did not agree with the accuracy of the arguments of law put by the
lessor for the reasons set out above.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
26. Secondly and more broadly, some principles of law can be found underlying
just about any dispute occurring in society between individuals. Even the
innocuous actions of a person patting their pet cat could raise legal issue of the
duty owed to animals etc. In the present Tribunal’s view, it is neither necessary
nor helpful for the Tribunal to adopt the reductionist approach of reducing every
dispute that comes before it, to a legal one. Most disputes that come before the
Tribunal are fundamentally social disputes and the parties are looking for a
resolution of their dispute. They are not interested in paying lawyers to play
legal games and have no delusion that they are in the High Court. This is not to
Press, 7th ed) at [2.187.2]
say that the law is ignored. It sits in the background as the ultimate resolution to
any impasse between the parties.
27. The dispute resolving approach referred to above is entirely consistent with the
alternative dispute resolution mechanisms used by the Tribunal and by courts
generally, where arbitrations/hearing are only invoked after the parties cannot
be guided, persuaded, or induced to settle the dispute on a basis that they can
live with.
28. In the end the Tribunal formed the view that the legal dimensions of this dispute
were ‘much ado about nothing’. It was really all about personal animosities
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! being played out in a public forum.
29. The Tribunal ordered that the tenant pay the lessors the rounded off sum of
$640 on or before 2 October 2020. This sum was composed of one week rent
and the Tribunal lodgement fee.
30. One of the parties subsequently communicated with the Registrar and asked for
reason for the decision. These are those reasons.
………………………………..
Senior Member A Anforth
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Date(s) of hearing 18 September 2020
Applicant: In person
Respondent: In person