UstLll AustLII AustLI
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
CITATION: The Commissioner for Social Housing in the ACT v Norman FAULL
[2008] ACTRTT (20)
RT 758 of 2008
Catchwords: Injury
Serious or continuous interference with quiet enjoyment of premises
Legislation: Residential Tenancies Act 1997 (ACT)
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust Sections: 51; 104
Tribunal: J Lennard, Member
Date: 12 October 2008
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
RE: The Commissioner for Social
Housing in the ACT
(Applicant/Lessor)
AND: Norman FAULL
(Respondent/Tenant)
DECISION
Tribunal : Jann Lennard, Member
Date : 12 October 2008
+LILAustLx AustLII AustLII Aust!
Orders:
1. That the residential tenancy relating to the respondents tenant’s
occupancy of premises at 13/5 Cerutty Crescent, Gordon, ACT, shall
terminate at 10am on 13 October 2008.
2. That the tenant is to vacate the premises and grant vacant possession
to the lessor by 4pm, 14 October 2008.
3. In default of Order 2, the Registrar is to issue a warrant of eviction.
The need for service of the warrant is dispensed with.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
…………………………….
Jann Lennard, Member
12 October 2008
RE: The Commissioner for Social
Housing in the ACT
(Applicant/Lessor)
AND: Norman FAULL
(Respondent/Tenant)
REASONS FOR DECISION
Jann Lennard, Member
Re: Premises at 13/5 Cerutty Crescent, GORDON. A.C.T.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
DECISION
THE TENANCY
1. The applicant lessor and the respondent tenant entered into a residential
tenancy agreement in relation to premises at 13/5 Cerutty Crescent,
GORDON, ACT on 12 January 2006.
2. The unit occupied by Mr Faull is in a complex also known as Barrington
Gardens. Most of the people who are tenants in the property are elderly.
THE APPLICATION
3. The lessor made application to the Residential Tenancies Tribunal for a
termination and possession order pursuant to section 51 of the residential Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Tenancies Act 1997.
51 Damage, injury or intention to damage or injure
On application by a lessor, the tribunal may make a termination and
possession order effective immediately if satisfied that the tenant has
intentionally or recklessly caused or allowed, or is likely to cause or allow –
…
(c) if the lessor is a corporation – injury to a representative of the corporation
or a member of the representative’s family;
(d) serious or continuous interference with the quiet enjoyment of nearby
premises by an occupier of the premises.
PROCEDURE
4. The lessor’s application was filed on 17 September 2008.
5. The application was listed for a directions hearing on 22 September 2008. Mr
Robert Clynes of Counsel appeared for the applicant and Ms Jaleh
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Johannessen (WRLC) appeared for the respondent. In view of the serious
allegations made by the applicant the Tribunal directly addressed Mr Faull
and sought, and was given, an undertaking that he would refrain from contact
with his neighbours and in particular would avoid any loud, aggressive or
abusive behaviour. Mr Faull told the Tribunal that he was “off the alcohol”.
The tribunal made the following orders:
That the application was adjourned for a hearing on 1 October 2008.
That the Applicant and Respondent are to provided witness lists by
26/09/08.
That the Applicant and Respondent are to file and serve any further
documents upon which they seek to rely by 26/09/08.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
That the Applicant has leave to serve a subpoena on the Australian
Federal Police returnable by 30/09/08.
6. On 30 September 2008 the respondent made an application for an
adjournment. The statement of particulars attached to the original application
was incomplete in that several pages were missing. In order to allow the
respondent sufficient time to properly instruct Ms Johannessen, the matter
was adjourned to 8 October 2008. The subpoena was returned and the
Tribunal determined to accept all police reports relating to the tenant’s
premises.
7. The matter was heard on 8 October 2008. Mr McCarthy of Counsel and Ms
Rebekah Knox ACT Government Solicitor, appeared for the applicant, and,
Ms Jaleh Johannessen (WRLC) appeared for the respondent.
THE EVIDENCE BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL
8. Documents attached to the application:
a. Statement of particulars - detailed chronology of the tenancy.
i. Complaints received by the lessor from other residents in the
Barrington Gardens complex - the first complaint was received
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! on 9 February 2006. Complaints continued to be received
throughout the tenancy. The complaints concerned Mr Faull’s
conduct when intoxicated and the conduct of many visitors to
his unit. In particular bad language, loud music, shouting and
arguments.
ii. The lessor had served notices upon the tenant requiring the
tenant to remedy the breach of the tenancy agreement
constituted by this conduct.
b. Internal documents of the lessor:
i. Copies of notices and letters sent to Mr Faull and file notes
and internal minutes as well as copies of letters of complaint
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
received from residents of neighbouring premises. These also
detail Mr Fall’s antisocial behaviour, in particular abusive and
foul language, threats made to residents of nearby premises,
loud shouting and loud music as well as harassment of women.
ii. These internal documents are evidence of the number of
complaints, the regularity of the complaints and the actions
taken by the lessor to deal with the issues. Mr Faull has been
informed of the complaints and told that his conduct is not
acceptable. Conferences, case meetings with Mr Faull’s
support workers are documented.
iii. Some of these documents indicate that Mr Faull has threatened
retribution upon his neighbours should he be evicted.
iv. These documents included a letter from Directions ACT to
ACT Housing, dated 6 December 2007. This letter is asking
that ACT Housing review the Notice to Vacate served upon
Mr Faull. Its contents are summarised as follows:
1. Mr Faull is a lifelong alcoholic. When he is intoxicated
his level of functioning is diminished. He recognises
the difficulties caused for his neighbours by his
conduct but is not able to tell his friends to leave the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! premises
2. Mr Faull is functioning well in the premises he enjoys
living there. The writer stated that living in the
complex works for Norman but not the other residents.
3. If ACT housing were to allocate a different property to
Mr Faull, where he could have a garden and a place to
keep his dog, and, be in close proximity to support
services this would address the problems caused by the
impact of his conduct on his neighbours.
4. If Mr Faull were to be evicted without reallocation he
will end up “on the streets”. This would be detrimental
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
to his physical and emotional health and wellbeing.
c. Written statements – these people gave oral evidence in the hearing
and the content of their statements is summarised below.
i. Anna Howell, Housing Manager.
ii. Catharina (Karen) Hughes - resident of complex.
iii. Kenneth Slater - resident of complex.
iv. Leone Peters - resident of complex.
v. Roslyn James - resident of complex
9. Documents filed prior to hearing
a. Written statement by Brendan Paul Jones, Security Guard. Mr Jones
was not called to give evidence, therefore the contents of his
statement, although not denied by Mr Faull, must be assessed with
caution by the Tribunal. The statement deals with events in the early
hours of September 19 2008. The Security firm had been engaged by
the lessor to patrol the premises about one week previous to these
events. Mr Jones states that while he was driving past unit 13 a male
person from the unit came out and was running toward my car and
yelling abuse and saying he was going to kill me. I think he yelled
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! twice that he was ”going to kill” me.
b. Supplementary statements from Catherina Hughes
c. Medical Report from Dr Reeni Sathiamala dated 25 September and
regarding Catherina Hughes
d. Handwritten diary entry of Leone Peters regarding incident on 25
September 2008
e. Typed transcript of diary notes of Leone Peters for the period 11
January 2008 to 12 September 2008.
10. Evidence provided by witnesses at the hearing
a. Anna Louise Howell, Housing Manager
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
i. Ms Howell gave evidence of her contact with Mr Faull and
with other residents of the complex. In general she stated that
the other residents were distressed by the loud music, abusive
conduct and bad language used by Mr Faull and his visitors.
She also stated that many of the residents had complained to
her that they were in fear of Mr Faull.
ii. Ms Howell gave evidence an incident on 10 April 2008. She
was visiting the complex to visit another resident Mr Faull
approached her to discuss complaints being made by other
residents about his conduct. Mr Faull stated that people around
here were making complaints about him and if he gets evicted
he will kill them. He stated that it was the woman in the corner
at number 15 and the ‘bastard next door’.
…I’m going to get them killed if they evict me
I don’t hurt women but I will organise to have them killed
…
…I have been in jail for murder
Following this incident ACT Housing put in place a policy that
required more than one person to attend the complex if the visit was
to Mr Faull.
iii. Ms Howell gave evidence of an incident on 11 September
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! 2008. She was visiting the complex to visit another resident.
Mr Faull came out of his unit and objected to her looking into
his unit. As Ms Howell, accompanied by another resident, Ms
Catherina Hughes, returned from the visit Mr Faull shouted at
her I am going to damage you you cunt. This threat was
repeated several times. Mr Faull apologise for his conduct.
iv. Ms Howell stated that she was genuinely afraid and feared for
her safety. She stated that, although he was intoxicated, Mr
Faull’s tone and manner as aggressive and serious and she
formed the view that he really meant what he said.
v. Ms Howell gave evidence of the effect that this incident had
upon her. She has suffered high levels of stress and anxiety, Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
and has difficulty sleeping. She is receiving counselling to
assist her in dealing with this. Due to the concerns she has for
her personal safety she no longer visits the Barrington Gardens
complex.
b. Catherina Hughes, Unit 15/5 Cerutty Crescent Gordon.
i. Ms Hughes ‘ unit is diagonally opposite Mr Faull’s unit she
can see the front of his unit from hers. Ms Hughes is a
pensioner and is at home most of the time.
ii. Ms Hughes gave extensive evidence of the conduct of Mr
Faull and of his visitors:
1. Mr Faull is more often than not intoxicated. This
witness was of the view that intoxication made his
behaviour worse. She stated that the conduct
complained of was usually at its worst from early
afternoon to about 2am.
2. In general the conduct complained of consists of:
a. Loud and abusive language
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! b. Foul language – the words ‘fucking’ and ‘cunt’
are constantly used
c. Aggressive behaviour
d. Noise form the visitors coming and going and
their arguments.
3. Ms Hughes gave corroborative evidence of the incident
involving the first witness on 11 September 2008. She
confirmed that Mr Faull had threatened and abused Ms
Howell.
4. Ms Hughes gave evidence that Mr Faull used abusive
language to herself and other residents of the complex.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
She described his conduct as aggressive. In particular
she stated that on 8 March 2008 she had twice heard
Mr Faull yelling at Les (Mr Faull’s Neighbour) that he
was going to ‘get him’ and he was going to ‘kill him’.
Police reports obtained in response to subpoena
confirmed that police had attended the premises twice
on 8 March and each time had arrested Mr Faull for
breach of the peace. The police report describes Mr
Fall as heavily intoxicated, aggressive to both police
and his neighbours and as making threats to his
neighbours.
5. Ms Hughes gave evidence that Mr Faull had threatened
her and had come to her residence and abused her ‘on a
number of occasions’. MS Hughes stated that Mr Faull
had told her that he had killed someone and had gone to
jail for murder.
iii. Ms Hughes described the effect that Mr Faull’s conduct had
had upon her: the noise and disturbances are described as
almost daily. She stated that she was constantly in fear for her
personal safety and afraid to go out of her unit or to walk past
Mr Faull’s unit. She locks her house and keeps all windows
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! shut even in the heat of summer, in an attempt to keep out the
noise. Ms Hughes stated that she was a prisoner in her own
home. In her written statement Ms Hughes says I constantly
feel threatened by him. Sometimes I just lock myself in and try
to tune out to what is going on. She states that she cannot
sleep, she is frightened of Mr Faull and that his intimidating
and abusive manner has caused her stress. She is receiving
medical attention for this stress. Dr Sathiamal gave evidence
via phone to the tribunal. This evidence confirmed that Ms
Hughes’ levels of anxiety and stress had increased and that an
increase in medication was required.
iv. Ms Hughes stated that in the last two week she had seen Mr Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Faull intoxicated but that there had been no yelling or threats
over the past two weeks. ACT Housing has a security guard at
the complex every day from 4pm to midnight.
c. The evidence of the other witnesses called by the applicant was in
similar terms. The tribunal found each of theses witnesses to be
reliable and credible. The constant themes were of loud noise,
aggressive conduct, foul language and threatening behaviour. Each
witness stated that their own use and enjoyment of their premises had
been significantly diminished by the conduct of Mr Faull and his
visitors, each spoke of being afraid, having to keep windows closed.
Ms James gave evidence of not being able to use the back garden, of
not being able to have her grandchildren visit and of any visitors
having to stay inside the house to avoid the bad language and
interfering behaviour of Mr Faull.
d. The documents supplied by the AFP reveal that from May of 2007 to
August of 2008 there were 19 visits by the police to the complex.
Each of these visits was related to Mr Faull’s conduct. The police
reports describe conduct similar that described in the evidence of the
witnesses.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! 11. Mr Faull’s evidence. Mr Faull did not deny the conduct described by the
witnesses. He stated that he was an alcoholic and that when he was drunk he
did behave in the manner described by his neighbours. When specific
incidents were put to him he said he could not remember and that when he
was intoxicated he often ‘blacked out’ so that he does not know what he is
doing and has no memory of his conduct. Mr Faull acknowledged that he had
yelled at his neighbours, that he was unable to control the conduct of
‘outsiders’ who visit his premises. He knew that his neighbours were upset
and he didn’t blame them for being so upset.
12. Mr Faull said that he is now going to detox and was trying to ‘get off’
alcohol. He said he had told the troublemakers to stay away from his unit and
he had a friend who had been dry for 8 weeks who was supporting him. He Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
did however acknowledge that he had tried many times in the past to give up
alcohol but always fell off the wagon after a few weeks. Although Mr Faull
stated that he was receiving support from counsellors there was no
independent evidence of this.
13. The application for a termination and possession order is brought under s51 of
the Act. If the tribunal is satisfied that the Mr Faull has intentionally or
recklessly caused or allowed, or is likely to cause or allow injury to a
representative of the applicant lessor or serious or continuous interference
with the quiet enjoyment of their premises by Mr Faull’s neighbours, then the
tribunal may make a termination and possession order.
14. The applicant lessor argues that Ms Howell has been injured. The lessor must
prove on the balance of probabilities that the tenant has intentionally caused
such injury. Briginshaw v Briginshaw [1938] HCA 34; (1938) 60 CLR 336.
There must be sufficient evidence for the tribunal to be satisfied that more
likely than not there has been an injury. Injury can be physical or mental
damage to a person. Stress caused by threats or abuse is such an injury. Ms
Johannessen argued that while mental distress and the consequent depression,
stress and anxiety caused may be an injury there was no medical evidence to
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! support Ms Howell ‘s evidence. Ms Johannessen argued that the counselling
Ms Howell was having could be seen as a duty of care issue for the applicant
rather than evidence of injury. Ms Johannessen referred the tribunal to
Department of Housing v Johnstone [2001] NSWRT 85 (30 April 2001) and
argued that in the absence of medical evidence the injury could not be made
out. In Department of Housing v Crook [2003] NSWCTTT 268 (14 March
2003) the NSW tribunal held that it was possible to find that there is an injury
without medical evidence. The Tribunal is satisfied that Ms Howell has
suffered an injury as a result of the verbal abuse and threats made to her by
Mr Faull on 11 September 2008. In this case it seems that Mr Faull’s conduct
is not likely to change and therefore it is likely that his conduct could cause
similar injury to representatives of the lessor.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
15. Mr Faull’s conduct constitutes a serious and continuous interference with the
quiet enjoyment of their premises by Mr Faull’s neighbours. Quiet enjoyment
is the legal concept of a tenant being entitled to hold the premises and use
them for normal residential purposes without interference. It is a right in the
tenant to enjoy the premises for all usual purposes free from interference. This
would encompass the notion of reasonable peace, comfort or privacy of the
tenant in the use by the tenant of the premises and would include, but is not
confined to, the right to prevent others from entering the premises, the right to
prevent others from damaging the premises, the right to enter and exit the
premises without fear of threats or abuse while using common areas to do so,
and the right to use the house and surrounding gardens for relaxation and
enjoyment without being abused, threatened or made to feel unsafe.
16. A wide range of conduct has been found to amount to interference with quiet
enjoyment: violent and abusive behaviour Sampson v Floyd [1989] 33 EG 41;
noise alone Hawkesbury Nominees P/L v Battik P/L, [2000] FCA 185 (1
March 2000) and failure by the lessor to take steps to prevent others from
causing interference with quiet enjoyment Aussie Traveller P/L v Marklea
P/L, [1997] QCA 2(11 February 1997), continual loud swearing and abuse
ACT Housing v Frank [2006] ACTRTT 8, noise of many cars coming and
going, loud music, loud voices, bad language, abusive behaviour and making
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! of threats ACT Housing v Margules [2003] ACTRTT 6.
17. The tenants right to quiet enjoyment arises out of their use of residential
premises, and the interference must be one that involves the use of the
residential premises leased to them by the lessor. Personal discomfort may be
caused by being prevented, through the conduct of neighbours, from being
able to make full use of premises or land. The definition of ‘premises’ as set
out in the Residential Tenancies Act 1997 includes land and part of any
premises. If fear of abuse, violence or assault prevents a householder from
entering a garden or opening windows, this is a direct and fundamental
interference with the usual use of premises and thus an interference with quiet
enjoyment. Where a tenant’s daily activities are interfered with by noise or
abuse emanating from adjoining premises, this is also interference with quiet Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
enjoyment.
18. The evidence of the neighbours of Mr Faull was that their use of their
premises was diminished as a direct result of his conduct. The noise, abuse,
threats and foul language caused stress and loss of sleep. Residents kept their
windows closed and so suffered from heat in the summer and felt that they
were prisoners in their own homes. Some gave evidence, of not being able to
use their gardens and of not being able to have visitors. Some gave evidence
of being afraid for their personal safety. The tribunal finds that Mr Faull has
caused serious and continuous interference with the quiet enjoyment of their
premises by his neighbours.
19. Upon finding that the factors in section 51 (c) and (d) are established on the
evidence , the tribunal may make a termination and possession order. In
Eastman v Commissioner for Housing in the Australian Capital Territory
[2006] ACTSC 52 the court held that the use of the word may confers upon
the tribunal a discretion to be exercised in deciding whether to make a
termination and possession order. Although that case related to an application
under s47, the tribunal is of the view that the discretion also exists in relation
to s51.
20. The tribunal must exercise the discretion in the light of the purpose and scope
of the Act. The factors, which may be considered in the exercise of that
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! discretion, are to be determined by the interpretation of the legislation
conferring that discretion. Thus the Residential Tenancy Tribunal may
consider relevant factors relating to its discretion under s51 in light of the rest
of the Act. Elsewhere in the Act the Tribunal has discretion to refuse to make
termination and possession orders, albeit somewhat limited. The tribunal is of
the opinion that matters which go to the fundamental nature of a residential
tenancy, which reflect the balance of the interests of the lessor as a provider
of housing and the interests of tenants as householders would fall within the
range of factors to be taken into account in the exercise by the Residential
Tenancy Tribunal of the discretion conferred in s 51.
21. Ms Johannessen urged the tribunal to take into account a number of factors:
a. that s51 was not the appropriate section for such an application Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
because it was an emergency measure and there are other processes
available to the lessor. The tribunal sees some force in this argument
because any order made under s51 is effective immediately. However,
the evidence of the lessor’s internal documents attached to the
application suggests that the lessor had employed other measures to
solve the issue, but with no success. The incidents of 11 September
2008 ( described above at para 10) and 19 September 2008 (described
above in para 9), combined with the evidence of Mr Faull’s threats of
retaliation plus the need to employ a security guard at the premises on
a daily basis are also important matter to consider.
b. That Mr Faull was attempting to deal with his alcohol problem and
that the abuse and bad behaviour had been less in the past few weeks.
If the tribunal could be satisfied that the complained of conduct was
more likely than not to cease this would be an important matter to
weigh in consideration of the exercise of its discretion. However, there
was no evidence before the tribunal of any program or counselling that
Mr Faull was participating in; on his own admission, Mr Faull had
tried to deal with his alcohol problems in the past. At the hearing on
22 September Mr Faull told the Tribunal that he was “off the alcohol”.
The evidence before the tribunal suggests that he has been drunk on
most days between then and this hearing. In the absence of any real
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
evidence that Mr Faull has taken positive steps to deal with his
alcoholism and the associated behavioural problems the tribunal is of
the view that his statements to the tribunal should be given little
weight.
22. The tribunal also takes into account that the lessor is the ‘landlord of last
resort ‘ in the territory and that if a termination and possession order is made,
Mr Faull is likely to be homeless. Living on the streets will put him in danger
and be detrimental to his physical and emotional health and wellbeing.
23. The tribunal is aware of the difficulties that Mr Faull will face if evicted from
his unit. The tribunal has no power to order the lessor to transfer Mr Faull to
other more suitable premises, but urges the lessor to consider this course of Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
action. The cost to the territory is likely to be great if Mr Faull becomes a
homeless person this includes police, medical and hospital costs.
24. Against Mr Faull's interest the tribunal must weigh those of the lessor and his
neighbours. There is no doubt that the neighbours have been significantly and
adversely affected by Mr Faull’s conduct. They are entitled to the full use and
quiet enjoyment of their homes, and have been denied this. Representatives of
the lessor, whose employment may involve dealing with difficult situations,
are nonetheless entitled to go about their daily work without threat of or
actual injury.
25. Taking all matters into account the tribunal makes the following orders.;
ORDERS
1. That the residential tenancy relating to the respondent tenant’s occupancy of premises
at 13/5 Cerutty Crescent, GORDON, ACT, shall terminate at 10am on 13 October
2008.
2. That the tenant is to vacate the premises and grant vacant possession to the lessor by
4pm 14 October 2008.
3. In default of order 2 the Registrar is to issue a warrant of eviction. The need for
service of the warrant is dispensed with.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
JANN LENNARD
12 0CTOBER 2008
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi