UstLI AustLII AustLI
ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
COMPLAINANT 201908 v COMMISSIONER FOR FAIR
TRADING (Discrimination) [2021] ACAT 2
DT 8/2019
Catchwords: DISCRIMINATION – irrelevant criminal record – quantum of
compensation to be determined – available remedies –
reassessment of application for motor vehicle traders licence –
where apology sought – damages under the Human Rights
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Commission Act 2005 – compensation for non-economic loss –
no exemplary damages awarded – compensation for ‘loss of
chance’ – interest
Legislation cited: Human Rights Commission Act 2005 s 53E
Traders Licensing Act 2016
Subordinate
Legislation cited: ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Procedures Rules
2020 r 101, 102
Cases cited: Abraham v Thomas [2020] ACAT 41
Attorney-General v Commonwealth & Finite Group 2018 Aus
HRC 124
AW v Data#3 [2016] Aus HRC 105
BE v Suncorp Group Ltd [2018] Aus HRC 121
Clarke v Catholic Education Office [2003] FCA 1085 Us" [II Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Clinch v Rep (No. 2) [2020] ACAT 68
Complainant 201922 v Barac [2020] ACAT 37
Complainant 201908 v Commissioner for Fair Trading [2020]
ACAT 24
Gentleman v Linfox 2017 Aus HRC 113
Goldman Sachs JBWere Services Pty Ltd v Nikolich [2007]
FCAFC 120
Green v State of Queensland, Brooker and Keating [2017]
QCAT 8
Huntley v State of NSW Department of Police and Justice
(Corrective Services NSW) [2015] FCCA 1827
Kidman v Casino Canberra Ltd ACN 051 204 114 [2020]
ACAT 50
Kovac v the Australian Croatian Club Ltd (No 2) [2016]
ACAT 4
KS and XT v Calvary Health Care ACT trading as Calvary
Hospital and Dr Andrew Foote [2018] ACTSC 84
AustLII AustLI
Malec v J. C. Hutton Pty Ltd [1990] HCA 20
Mayer v Australian Nuclear Science & Technology
Organisation [2003] FMCA 209
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Guo (1997) 191
CLR 559
Qantas Airways Limited v Gama [2008] FCAFC 69
Richardson v Oracle Corporation Australia Pty Ltd [2014]
FCAFC 82
Smith v Reflex Traffic Systems Pty Ltd 2018 Aus HRC 125
Swan v Monash Law Book Co-operative [2013] VSC 326
Wang v ACT [2016] ACAT 71
Wattle v Kirkland & Anor (No 2) [2002] FMCA 135
Willett v State of Victoria [2013] VSCA 76
Tribunal: Presidential Member H Robinson
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi
Date of Orders: 13 January 2021
Date of Reasons for Decision: 13 January 2021
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
istLI AustLII AustLI
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL DT 8/2019
BETWEEN:
COMPLAINANT 201908
Applicant
AND:
COMMISSIONER FOR FAIR TRADING
Respondent
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
TRIBUNAL: Presidential Member H Robinson
DATE: 13 January 2021
ORDER
The Tribunal orders that:
1. The respondent must not repeat the unlawful act of taking into account the
applicant’s irrelevant criminal record in any future licence application made
by the applicant for a motor vehicle dealers licence under the Traders
Licensing Act 2016. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
2. The respondent to pay to the applicant:
(a) General damages of $15,000; and
(b) $29,600 for loss of opportunity.
(c) $2166.31 interest.
………………………………..
Presidential Member H Robinson
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. The background to this matter is set out in the decision in Complainant 201908
v Commissioner for Fair Trading [2020] ACAT 24 (the liability decision).
Briefly stated, the Tribunal determined that the respondent discriminated against
the applicant because of his criminal record (the denial decision). The parties
agree that the applicant is entitled to compensation under section 53E of the
Human Rights Commission Act 2005 (HRC Act) for loss, damage or injury
sustained because of the denial decision. The only issue before the Tribunal is
the assessment of that compensation.
Orders sought
2. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! In his submissions dated 3 June 2020 the applicant set out the orders he seeks
against the respondent as follows:
1. Re-assessment and re-issuing of any application for a motor-vehicle
licence, irrespective of the refusal decision made on 13 December
2018.
2. In the alternative to order 1, not repeat the unlawful act of taking
into account the applicant’s irrelevant criminal record in any future
licence application made by the applicant.
3. Provide a written apology for its error in taking into account the
applicant’s irrelevant criminal record.
4. Pay reasonable compensation to the applicant, as assessed by the
Tribunal at the damages hearing on 27 July 2020.
3. In relation to the claim for damages, the applicant seeks:
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
(a) General damages for exacerbation of a medical condition, pain and
suffering, as well as humiliation and distress, caused by the respondent’s
discriminatory conduct.
(b) Past economic loss and future economic loss.
(c) Medical treatment expenses to date, unparticularised.
(d) A buffer for future medical expenses, unparticularised.
(e) Interest pursuant to the Court Procedures Rules 2006 and the ACAT
Procedural Rules.
4. In his oral submissions at hearing, the applicant sought general damages of
$75,000, and damages for economic loss of $83,659.1
5. The applicant did not quantify his claims for medical treatment and medical
expenses, and they do not appear to be pressed. No evidence in support of these
claims was put before the Tribunal.
6. For its part, the respondent conceded that the applicant is entitled to damages
for exacerbation of a pre-existing medical condition but made no submissions
on an appropriate sum. The respondent denies that the applicant is entitled to
any other kind of compensation, including any compensation for economic loss.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! In particular, the respondent contends that the applicant’s proposed business
was too speculative to attract damages for ‘loss of a chance’ to establish it.
Available remedies
7. As the Tribunal is satisfied that the respondent has engaged in unlawful
discrimination, section 53E(2) of the HRC Act requires that the Tribunal make
one or more orders:
(2) The ACAT must make 1 or more of the following orders:
(a) that the person complained about not repeat or continue the
unlawful act;
(b) that the person complained about perform a stated reasonable
act to redress any loss or damage suffered by a person because of
the unlawful act;
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
(c) unless the complaint has been dealt with as a representative
complaint—that the person complained about pay to a person a
stated amount by way of compensation for any loss or damage
suffered by the person because of the unlawful act.
8. Taking each of the applicant’s claimed remedies in turn:
1 Transcript of proceedings 28 July 2020 pages 125 - 131
Re-assessment or reissuing of the licence or an order not to repeat the unlawful
conduct
9. Under section 53E(2)(a), it is open to the Tribunal to order that the respondent
not repeat the unlawful act – that is, it is open to the Tribunal to order that the
respondent not repeat the unlawful act of taking into account the applicant’s
irrelevant criminal record in any future licence application made by the
applicant.
10. It is not within the power of the Tribunal, sitting in this jurisdiction, to stand in
the shoes of the decision-maker and remake the denial decision. It is also not
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! within the power of the Tribunal to order that a licence be issued. If the
applicant reapplies, that assessment will need to be undertaken under the
Traders Licensing Act 2016 in a manner that is not in breach of the
Discrimination Act 1991.
11. I will order that that the respondent not repeat the unlawful act.
The written apology
12. The applicant has suffered loss by way of hurt feelings and humiliation and
seeks some form of redress. I am satisfied that an apology may be a reasonable
act to address that loss and damage, as per section 53E(2)(b). The respondent
has agreed to provide the applicant with a written apology.
Compensation for loss and damage Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
13. In broad terms, section 53E(2)(c) of the HRC Act provides that the Tribunal
may order that a respondent pay damages for “any loss or damaged suffered by
the person because of [the respondent’s] unlawful act”.
14. Section 53E(2)(c) of the HRC Act provides that in making an order for
compensation under section 53E(3) the Tribunal must consider a range of
matters:
(a) the person’s right to equality before the law and the impact of the
discrimination on the enjoyment of that right; and
(b) the inherent dignity of all people and the impact of the
discrimination on the person's dignity; and
(c) the public interest in ensuring an appropriate balance between the
right to equal and effective protection against discrimination and
equality before the law without distinction or discrimination and
other human rights; and
(d) the nature of the discrimination; and
(e) any mitigating factors.
15. In order for damages to be awarded to the applicant under this section, he must
establish, on the balance of probabilities, that:
(a) He suffered loss or damage; and
(b) That the refusal decision materially contributed to that loss or damage; 2
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! The factors in section 53E(3) of the HRC Act should then be considered in
determining the quantum.
16. Compensation under the HRC Act is designed to place the applicant in the
position he would have been in had there not been an unlawful act of
discrimination against him. 3 While the principles of tort provide a guide, the
damage is primarily statutory and determined by reference to the scope and
purpose of the HRC Act. 4 The considerations in section 53E(3) of the HRC Act
in particular distinguish compensation under the Discrimination Act from that
available in tort.
17. Aggravated damages may be awarded where the defendant behaved “high
handedly, maliciously, insultingly or oppressively in committing the act of
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
discrimination.”5 The applicant’s lawyer submitted that the respondent’s
conduct during the hearing exacerbated his injury and I have considered that
claim below.
18. As noted above, one of the more complicated aspects of this case is that it
includes a claim for economic loss arising from the applicant’s loss of a chance
to establish a successful second-hand car sales business. Assessing this
compensation requires the Tribunal to determine, on the balance of
2 Kovac v The Australian Croatian Club Ltd (No 2) [2016] ACAT 4 at [45]-[55], [56]; Maritime Union of
Australia v Fair Work Ombudsman [2015] FCAFC 120 at [28]
3 Kovac No 2 at [37]
4 Human Rights Commission Act 2004 section 53E(2)(c), 53E(3)
5 Hall v Sheiban (1989) 20 FCR 217; Kovac No 2 at [24]
probabilities, what would or might have occurred, but which can no longer
occur because of the contravention,6 and assign an amount of compensation that
reflects that loss. This requires some degree of prognostication.
19. I will deal with the claim for compensation for non-economic loss, and
particularly compensation for exacerbation of a medical condition, and then turn
to the question of economic loss.
The applicant’s claim for compensation for non-economic loss
20. The applicant seeks damages for aggravation of his medical condition, pain and
suffering and humiliation and distress.
21. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! It is no easy task to put a value on mental injuries or emotional pain, particularly
where the medical evidence is limited in scope. However, to deny the applicant
damages simply because of the impossibility of demonstrating the correctness
of any particular figure would be to visit injustice on him. 7 The Tribunal must
do the best it can on the evidence before it.
22. Helpfully, the parties have agreed that the applicant suffered an aggravation of a
pre-existing medical condition, and that the refusal decision made a 50%
contribution to that. The characterisation of that injury and the compensation
payable was left to the Tribunal.
23. To assist with this assessment, the Tribunal has before it two medical
assessments. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
24. The first is a report by Dr Saboisky, psychiatrist, dated 6 September 2019
(Saboisky report). Dr Saboisky opines that the applicant suffered, at the time
of the report, from an adjustment disorder with mixed emotional features,
depression, anxiety, and anger. Dr Saboisky considered that the refusal decision
had a significant effect on the applicant, and that:
There has been a significant psychological impact on him since the
refusal in December 2018. He is very focused on getting justice. He
ruminates excessively about what has happened. He feels helpless,
worthless and hopeless. His concentration and focus have diminished. He
6Kovac No 2 at [24]
7 Hall v Sheiban (1989) 20 FCR 217 at 256 per Wilcox J
cannot sleep properly. He said he feels like a vegetable. He eats
excessively and drinks alcohol excessively on weekends.
25. Dr Saboisky considered the applicant’s prognosis “positive if there can be a
satisfactory settlement.”
26. The second report is that of Dr Kasinathan, based on an assessment of 3 October
2019. He observed:
[The applicant’s] affect (his external expression and mood) was generally
flat and restricted with a few small appropriate smiles. He did not evince
lability or irritability, though at one point was highly tearful and unable
to speak for 2 minutes when describing his feelings about Fair Trading.
His mood was reported as “depressed, anxious”. Objectively he appeared
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! depressed.
27. Dr Kasinathan diagnosed the applicant as suffering from major depressive
disorder (recurrent, major depressive episode), alcohol use disorder and
benzodiazepine use disorder, caused by a range of matters.
28. While the diagnoses differ, I do not consider it necessary to determine whether
the applicant suffered a major depressive episode or an exacerbation of his
adjustment disorder. Which it is does not make any significant difference to the
calculation of damages. Because the manner in which the medical condition
affected the applicant’s day to day life is more or less consistent between the
reports and is the relevant consideration for the calculation of damage.
29. Both reports date from late 2019. There is no evidence before the Tribunal of
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
ongoing treatment, and nor is there any evidence as to the applicant’s medical
condition as at the date of the hearing, or indeed at any time after he met with
Dr Kasinanthan in October 2019. Dr Saboisky suggests any illness is likely to
continue until the dispute is resolved, but on the applicant’s evidence he did not
have any counselling or seek any treatment. In the circumstances, I cannot
conclude that he continues to suffer from a diagnosable condition. As such, in
considering damages, I have taken into account that the medical evidence
relates to a fixed period of between 13 December 2018, when notified of the
decision, and 3 October 2019, after which there is no evidence of continued
illness, although nor is there evidence of resolution.
30. The lack of medical evidence is not, however, fatal to any claim for
compensation for pain, suffering, humiliation or stress, and the applicant gave
direct evidence as to the continuation of some of those emotions throughout
2019 and 2020. This is evidence of the impact of the discrimination on the
applicant’s dignity, and is a relevant consideration under section 53E(3)(b) of
the HRC Act even without a clear diagnosis.
31. The applicant’s evidence as to how the denial decision affected him was as
follows:
Since my licence application was denied I have been under severe stress,
fear, and have been under constant depression and anxiety. I regularly
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! experience panic attacks, paranoia and fear. I have also been forced by
Access Canberra's conduct to relive my past and I am having the emotions
of shame, hurt and regret. Since the refusal of my licence application, I
have been unable to cope with my day to day life.
I feel like I am no longer worthy of applying for a job or a licence that
requires police checks because, regardless of the relevant laws that may
apply, my criminal convictions will be used as means to blanket
discriminate against and exclude me. I have not been able to re-apply for
a job since I left the APS… I have no confidence and feel hopeless
because I fear I will be treated unfavourably regardless of my inherent
character and my extenuating circumstances.
32. This evidence was not seriously challenged. I accept the submission of the
respondent that some of the applicant’s shame, hurt and regret was because of
the fact of the criminal convictions, rather than the refusal decision per se, but
no doubt the denial decision re-enlivened or heightened those feelings. Atus Il AustLll AustLII AustLi
33. In terms of calculating the amount of compensation that should be awarded for
this loss, the applicant relied upon the decisions of the Full Court of the Federal
Court in Richardson v Oracle Corporation Australia Pty Ltd [2014] FCAFC 82
(Richardson) and the decision of the Federal Circuit Court in Huntley v State of
NSW, Department of Police and Justice (Corrective Services) [2015] FCCA
1827.
34. The respondent argued that these cases are distinguishable on their facts. In
particular, the medical and other evidence does not suggest that the applicant
suffered symptoms as severe as the plaintiffs in either of those cases.
35. Richardson concerned proven allegations of sexual harassment of the applicant
by a co-worker. The applicant had been subjected to a “humiliating series of
slurs, alternating with sexual advances, which built up into a more or less
constant barrage of sexual harassment.” 8 She was subsequently diagnosed as
suffering from a chronic adjustment disorder with mixed features of anxiety and
depression. While this was “not insignificant” it did not prevent her from
working and earning a living. The Court at first instance awarded $18,000,
which was consistent with awards in similar cases at that time. On appeal, the
Full Court overturned the award of $18,000 and instead awarded $100,000 in
general damages, and $30,000 for loss of opportunity of increased wages.
[AustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
36. In overturning the first instance decision, Justice Kenny noted that the previous
history for awards for such injuries was between $12,000 and $20,000 but went
on to say that:
tLI …in the context of damages for personal injury, there is reason to believe
that community standards now accord a higher value to compensation for
pain and suffering and loss of enjoyment of life than before.9
37. The Court went on to consider a number of other cases, albeit mainly in
Victoria. In Willett v State of Victoria [2013] VSCA 76 (Willett), the Victorian
Supreme Court replaced a finding of damages in the amount of $108,000, with
$250,000, in respect of damages for pain and suffering and loss of enjoyment of
life caused by exposure to bullying and harassment in her workplace.
Significantly:
Must !!! Aust!Il AustLI AustLi
Ms Willett’s injuries were serious. At the time of the trial, she was
undergoing treatment in a psychiatric hospital following an attempted
suicide: Willett v Victoria at [13]. 10
38. Ms Willet had a major depressive disorder and was permanently incapacitated
and unable to work. Neither the facts of Richardson, nor those of the
complainant in the present case, demonstrate an injury of that magnitude.
39. Their Honours also referred to another Victorian Supreme Court case, that of
Swan v Monash Law Book Co-operative [2013] VSC 326. In that case the
8 At [7]
9 At [96]
10 At [100] per Kenny J
applicant, Ms Swan, suffered a mental ‘breakdown’ as a consequence of the
harassment. The judge in that case, Dixon J, found (at [246]) that Ms Swan
suffered an “adjustment disorder/depressive condition, continuing anxiety and
depression”, but also a range of other serious conditions and was “substantially
compromised in most aspects of her life”. Again, that case is more severe than
the present one.
40. A further case considered was that of Nikolich v Goldman Sachs JB Ware
[2007] FCA 784. Mr Nikolich suffered a diagnosed psychiatric injury as a
consequence of workplace bullying and harassment and a failure by the
AustLII AustLII Austill Aust! workplace to comply with its own policies in relation to the management and
investigation of grievances. This delay was at least partially responsible for Mr
Nikolich’s psychological injury and that this psychological injury was
foreseeable. Mr Nikolich received $80,000 in general damages. Wilcox J
observed at [341]:
tLI
Assessment of general damages is necessarily a matter of judgment. Mr
Nikolich was extremely distressed and disturbed by the way in which he was
treated by GSJBWS’s employees. This caused him to suffer a mental illness
from which he has yet to fully recover. His psychological condition appears to
have been a major factor in the break-up of his marriage and separation from
his children. It must have adversely affected his professional reputation. On
the other hand, as I read the expert evidence, there is no reason to suppose
that Mr Nikolich’s psychological disability will be permanent. Although it
may take him some time to do so, there is every prospect that he eventually
will obtain employment and return to normal life.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
41. Having considered these, and other cases, and noted some of the damages
awarded, Justice Kenny observed that damages for sexual harassment had:
…scarcely altered since 2000 and does not reflect the shift in the
community’s estimation of the value to be placed on these matters. The
range has remained unchanged, notwithstanding that the community has
generally gained a deeper appreciation of the experience of hurt and
humiliation that victims of sexual harassment experience and the value of
loss of enjoyment of life occasioned by mental illness or distress caused
by such conduct.11
42. Her Honour awarded considerable damages to Ms Richardson to reflect the
changed community standards and acknowledgement of the emotional damage
caused to the victims of sexual harassment.
11 Richardson at [117]
UstLll AustLII AustLI
43. Significantly, however, in Richardson damages were awarded for both
psychological and reputational damage, and there is no evidence of significant
reputation damage in the present case. The Full Court also held that
Ms Richardson was entitled to compensation for the detriment the harassment
caused to the sexual relationship with her partner. Richardson marks the upper
11 11
level of damages awarded, and the evidence in this case does not point to
damage to the applicant of a level directly comparable to that suffered by Ms
Richardson.
44. Nonetheless, the applicant contended that similar considerations to those set out
by her Honour in Richardson should apply in this case. That is, there is now a
tLILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aus deeper understanding of the consequences of discrimination by government
agencies and the serious consequences denial of equal treatment can have for a
mental health. While I agree, ultimately I am satisfied that such considerations
are in any case reflected in the HRC Act itself, and particularly in section
53(3)(c), which requires that in considering compensation the tribunal must take
into account the person’s right to equality before the law and the impact of the
discrimination on the enjoyment of that right. Moreover, the Tribunal has
already recognised that the reasoning in Richardson applies beyond sexual
harassment cases.12
45. Before turning to quantum, it is useful to consider another case relied upon by
the applicant, the case of Huntley v State of NSW Department of Police and
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Justice (Corrective Services NSW) [2015] FCCA 1827 (Huntley). This matter
concerned a claim for disability discrimination. The applicant suffered from a
number of serious medical conditions that “restricted her ability to travel
without immediate access to a bathroom”. 13 This meant she was unable to attend
to the full range of work she was required to do in her substantive position of
Probation and Parole Officer.
46. The applicant initially negotiated an informal arrangement with modified duties
for six months, but the agreement affected her colleagues’ duties as well. At the
end of the six month period, the respondent advised the applicant that the
12 Kovac No 2 at [43], [78]
13 At [21]
informal arrangement could not continue due to the “constraints that it placed
on the operations in the workplace”.14 This was done without consultation or a
workplace assessment and without identifying for her the nature of the
constraints. The applicant was referred to a medical examiner and determined to
be unfit for duties. She obtained another position on a temporary placement, but
was required to take further sick leave. Her circumstances were the subject of
internal discussions within the agency, and those discussions were not disclosed
to the applicant. The applicant commenced action due to the employer’s refusal
to make reasonable accommodation. She was awarded $75,000 compensation
despite a pre-existing condition. In reaching that decision, Nicholls J
acknowledged the fine balancing act involved, but concluded the difficulty of
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
the task did not excuse a failure to provide reasonable adjustments.15
47. Huntley, again, represents one of the more significant compensation awards.
However, Ms Huntley experienced multi-faced discrimination in the workplace
for around four years. That discrimination exacerbated an existing condition and
impaired her recovery and resulted in symptoms significantly more complex
and serious than those experienced by the applicant in this case.
48. A third case of interest is that of Green v State of Queensland, Brooker and
/// / / / / / / / / / / 1 1 1
Keating [2017] QCAT 8. In that case, an initial award of $18,000 for non-
financial loss was increased to $100,000, on the basis that previous awards for
non-financial loss in sexual harassment cases – in the range between $12,000 to ELII AustLll Austill AustLi
$20,000 – were no longer in line with current community standards. The case is
a useful overview of compensation payments awarded in the wake of
Richardson.
49. In Green, Member Gordon reviewed Huntley, as above, in addition to the
following other like cases as follows:16
In Ingram v QBE Insurance (Australia) Ltd (Human Rights) [2015] VCAT
1936 it was found that the complainant had been discriminated against
because of her disability in the provision of goods and services. The
complainant had not suffered any recognised psychological injury arising
14 Huntley at [27]
15 Huntley at [259] – [261]
16 At [234] - [237]
from this but had caused her to feel upset, angry and frustrated and made
her feel like a second rate citizen. She had felt stigmatised about her
disability and had feelings of hopelessness, and caused her to contemplate
a former period of illness. Evidence was given that the complainant had
been in tears. One factor had been that the proceedings had taken three
years to come to trial so that these feelings had persisted over that time.
An award of $15,000 was made for non-financial loss. It is clear from the
report that this level of award was influenced by Richardson.
In Power v Bouvy and Bouvy v Power [2015] TASADT 2, the complainant
was subjected to a tirade of homophobic abuse and threats on the
telephone. After the call the perpetrator rang back at least 18 times and
on each occasion, left messages that were offensive and humiliating and
used abominable and disgusting language. This was found to be direct
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and also sexual
harassment. The conduct caused the complainant to be anxious and
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! fearful and under considerable strain. He suffered anxiety attacks and
continual nightmares, and was in fear of leaving his property and going
shopping alone. He had been prescribed anti-depressants. He was
unhappy, depressed, anxious and lost weight. Explaining that Richardson
had radically affected the quantum of compensation that is appropriate in
anti-discrimination matters, the tribunal awarded the complainant
$25,000 as compensation for non-financial loss.
In Collins v Smith (Human Rights) [2015] VCAT 1992 there were a series
of incidents of sexual harassment at work by the complainant’s direct
supervisor over a period of three months which caused the complainant
who was a particularly vulnerable employee, shock embarrassment and
humiliation. She left her job which she loved because of it. She suffered
severe psychological injury diagnosed as a chronic post-traumatic stress
disorder, major depressive disorder and anxiety disorder. The
complainant’s personality profile had been significantly adversely
impacted to the effect that her social relationships were inhibited and her
marital relationship had come under severe stress. This had required
continued treatment and counselling which would continue. The Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
complainant was not fit for work despite trying to retrain. The injury was
similar to that in Willett but less severe than in Swan. In giving her
reasons Judge Jenkins, Vice President of VCAT described Richardson as
a significant milestone in the articulation of the proper approach to the
assessment of damages in sexual harassment cases. The award was
$180,000 for non-financial loss plus $20,000 for aggravated damages.
In Kovac v The Australian Croatian Club Limited (No. 2)
(Discrimination) [2016] ACAT 4, three years before the hearing on
liability in 2014, the complainant had been denied membership of a club
because of his political conviction. The complainant had become
depressed and anxious, lost enjoyment from certain usual pleasures, had
become withdrawn, found it difficult to concentrate, had fleeting suicidal
thoughts, had become forgetful, was moody and irritable, had difficulty
sleeping, and had put on weight. He had felt humiliated, distressed and
ostracised and had difficulties arising from the events with his
relationships in his community, friends and family. He was diagnosed as
suffering from a chronic adjustment disorder with anxiety and depressed
mood. He was taking time off work sick. Influenced by Richardson and
other recent awards, an award of $30,000 was made for non-financial
loss.
50. Member Gordon concluded that compensation awards had increased in the
wake of Richardson, but not to the same degree as in that case.
51. Of relevance to this Tribunal, Member Gordon then considered the importance
of consistency in Tribunal decisions:17
The importance of consistency. The Tribunal reminds itself that the
objects of the QCAT Act include requirements to promote the quality and
consistency of tribunal decisions and to enhance the quality and
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi consistency of decisions made by decision makers. It is a function of the
Tribunal to ensure that like cases are treated alike. [emphasis in original]
One reason for consistency is so that parties or their lawyers can
calculate with reasonable accuracy the likely award should the claim
succeed. This promotes settlement of the case. This means in turn that the
Tribunal should be clear which path it will follow in the light of
Richardson.
Another reason for consistency is fairness. It may be unfair for the system
to offer to a successful complainant and require an unsuccessful
respondent to pay, an award which varies considerably between possible
venues.
[footnotes omitted]
52. Similar principles apply here, although considerations of consistency must also
consider community expectations as per Richardson, the development of case
law in jurisdictions other than this Tribunal, and past decisions within the
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Tribunal.
53. This Tribunal has made surprisingly few awards of damages, and generally the
awards have been toward the lower end of the spectrum.
54. The most significant awards were in Kovac v the Australian Croatian Club Ltd
(No 2) [2016] ACAT 4 (Kovac No 2) and in Wang v ACT [2016] ACAT 71
(Wang No 1).
55. In Kovac No 2 the applicant had suffered from a medical condition of chronic
adjustment disorder with anxiety and depressed mood as a consequence of racial
17 Green at [241] – [243]
discrimination, in the form of his exclusion from a social club. The amount
awarded for non-economic loss was $30,000. Significantly, in Kovac No 2, the
Tribunal considered that (as in Richardson) the evidence established that the
respondent engaged in conduct that was calculated and cruel and this
contributed to the applicant’s injury.
56. In Wang No 1 the Tribunal awarded compensation of $40,000 for anxiety,
embarrassment and humiliation (falling short of a mental injury). The case
concerned an allegation of racial discrimination, where the applicant was denied
entry into a course due having completed his medical qualification in a foreign
country. Liability was overturned on appeal, but no comment was made by the
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust Appeal Tribunal on the compensation awarded.
57. Other cases have resulted in more modest awards.
58. In Abraham v Thomas [2020] ACAT 41 the respondent was found to have
directly discriminated against the applicant by requiring her to work hours
beyond that contracted without compensation and participate in a cash back
scheme because of her immigration status. The Tribunal awarded $13,320.68 in
general damages for embarrassment, humiliation and stress.
59. In Complainant 201922 v Barac [2020] ACAT 37 the applicant, who was
disabled with limited mobility, was subjected to intimidating and humiliating
treatment, including being locked in a room. He received $1,000 for pain,
Must!Il Aust!Il AustLI AustLi
suffering and humiliation. The compensation payment awarded was what the
applicant sought, and was notably modest.
60. In Kidman v Casino Canberra Ltd ACN 051 204 114 [2020] ACAT 50 the
applicant was the subject of a workplace investigation that was attributable to
his industrial activity and that might have had serious consequences and that
caused him personal distress, stress and sleepless nights. There was no evidence
of a mental illness. He was awarded general damages is the amount of $4,000.
61. Clinch v Rep (No. 2) [2020] ACAT 68 involved unlawful vilification of the
applicant on the basis of her gender identity. The applicant was awarded
$10,000 in general damages for physical and psychological injuries and
humiliation. The sum also reflected the ongoing nature of the harm by reason of
having to progress the matter to hearing.
62. None of the aforementioned cases involve a case of discrimination based on
criminal record or conviction. For this form of discrimination, some guidance
may be found in a recent review of the recent federal decisions of the Australian
Human Rights Commission (AHRC) containing recommendations for non-
economic loss awards of damages for criminal conviction discrimination. A
review of these cases suggests that the recommended damages awards have
been modest, and seemingly lower than those recommended or awarded in other
cases of discrimination. For example:
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
(a) In Gentleman v Linfox 2017 Aus HRC 113 the complainant suffered hurt
feelings, humiliation and distress when he was not re-engaged under a
labour hire arrangement. The recommended compensation for non-
economic loss was $2,000.
(b) In Smith v Reflex Traffic Systems Pty Ltd 2018 Aus HRC 125 the
complainant suffered hurt feelings, humiliation and distress when a job
offer was rescinded on the basis of an irrelevant criminal record. The
recommended compensation for non-economic loss was $2,500.
(c) In Attorney-General v Commonwealth & Finite Group 2018 Aus HRC
124, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade encouraged Finite to
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
withdraw the complainant’s services, amounting to an exclusion based on
his criminal record. The complainant suffered hurt feelings, humiliation
and distress. The recommended compensation for non-economic loss was
$3,000.
(d) In BE v Suncorp Group Ltd [2018] Aus HRC 121 Suncorp rescinded an
offer of employment to the complainant on the basis of his criminal
record. The respondent suffered hurt feelings, humiliation and distress.
The recommended compensation for non-economic loss was $2,500.
(e) In AW v Data #3 [2016] Aus HRC 105 the complainant’s employment
was terminated on the basis his criminal record. He suffered hurt feelings,
humiliation and distress. The recommended award for non-economic loss
was $5,000.
63. AHRC decisions suggest compensation of between $3,000 and $3,500 is
appropriate for hurt and humiliation for discrimination on the basis of criminal
record. It is notable, however, these recommendations related to hurt,
humiliation and distress in the apparent absence of evidence of psychiatric or
psychological injury. They appear broadly consistent with the Tribunal’s
approach to compensation where there is no evidence of medical diagnosis.
64. It should also be noted that while the AHRC can make recommendations about
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! compensation, it cannot enforce those penalties, and the respondent may (and
often does) decline to pay18
.
Assessment of compensation
65. The Tribunal has before it clear evidence of an exacerbation of a pre-existing
psychological injury, albeit for a limited period, as well as evidence of ongoing
hurt feelings, humiliation and distress, continuing from the time of being
notified on the denial decision to the time of the compensation hearing, a period
from around 8 December 2018 to September 2020.
66. The denial decision compromised the applicant’s right to equality before the
law, and undermined his dignity, relevant considerations under section 53E(3)
of the HRC Act. It is appropriate that any compensation award consider the
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
public interest in ensuring equal and effective protection before the law without
unlawful discrimination, including equal treatment by government agencies.
Hence, consistent with Richardson, however, any award should reflect the
increasing awareness within the community of the effect of discrimination on
mental health and wellbeing and the foreseeable injury that may result.
67. However, the matter is no case is not without its mitigating factors, which also
need to be considered pursuant to section 53E(3)(e). The denial decision was a
18 Under the Commonwealth scheme, discrimination on the basis of criminal record may exist
under the Regulations, there is no means to pursue a remedy. Applicants may apply to the
Commission for conciliation of their complaint. If conciliation is unsuccessful, the Commission
may prepare a report with its findings and recommendations, for tabling in Parliament. The
Commission’s recommendations are not enforceable, and employers may decline to follow them.
consequence of a wrongful application of the law. While the decision perhaps
suggested a degree of prejudice against the holders of criminal records
generally, perhaps due in part to bureaucratic routine, there is no evidence that
the applicant was individually targeted or subjected to a deliberate cruelty of the
kind suffered by the applicant in Richardson, nor of the sustained discrimination
or serious medical consequences in Huntley. Nor is there any evidence of long
term psychological or psychiatric damage. The respondent is willing to
apologise.
68. Having regard to the above, I award $15,000 compensation for exacerbation of
the applicant’s pre-existing illness for the period from the denial decision to
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi November 2019, pain and suffering and for ongoing stress and humiliation.
Compensation – exemplary damages
69. Toward the end of his submissions, counsel for the applicant made the
following submission:19
We really do think that if there is no warrant for passing any negative
judgment on [the applicant’s] business capacity, there's a - I have to
report and I am instructed to say, a little bit of resentment that the
criticism of his capacities as a businessperson is coming from the same
body politic that has criticised his personal qualities on the basis of a
couple of bad months and resulting criminal convictions.
A generous approach ought now to be taken, in my respectful submission.
70. While I do not consider this to be an application for exemplary damages (so
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
much as a request to take a generous approach to general damages), as a matter
of completeness, I will deal with that issue in case that is what was suggested.
71. There is no basis upon which the Tribunal could award exemplary damages in
this case. The denial decision was not made out of spite, vengeance, or any
personal animosity toward the applicant himself. The Commissioner acted only
a mistaken belief as to the law. This distinguishes the matter from, for example,
Kovac No 2, where the tribunal actually found that there was a level of cruelty
in that conduct by the respondent, and a lot of the other cases actually indicate
19 Transcript of proceedings 28 July 2020 page 130
not only a level of cruelty but a level of ongoing cruelty and a level of ongoing
discrimination.
72. In relation to the hearing process, while I have no doubt the applicant felt some
distress and offence at the respondent’s questioning his business acumen, I am
satisfied that the respondent’s conduct of the proceedings was appropriate, and
necessary to the defence of this proceeding. Nothing about the respondent’s
conduct at the hearing nor anything in written submissions would warrant an
award of exemplary or punitive damages.
Compensation – economic loss
73. AustLII AusLII AustLII Aust! In support of his claim for past and future economic loss claim, the applicant
relied upon a report of Andrew Sykes, Director, RSM Australia Pty Ltd, dated
2 June 2020 (Sykes Report) and a witness statement from an experienced
motor vehicle dealer, Mr Petar Nachev.
tLI
74. In preparing his report Mr Sykes drew upon several sources, including a
business case and cash flow projections prepared by the applicant in order to
obtain finance. The business case formed the basis of the business model Mr
Sykes considered and assessed.
75. Mr Sykes drew upon comparable ACT market data to formulate projections for
what a viable small car dealership could expect to earn in future years. In broad
terms, he assumed:
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
(a) a starting stock of 10 vehicles;
(b) four vehicles sold per month at $16,250 per vehicle;
(c) a gross profit margin of $2,125;
(d) a net profit in year one of approximately $80,000, a majority of which
would be paid to the applicant as a dividend.
76. After considering a range of factors, Mr Sykes then calculated economic loss
suffered by the applicant because of the discrimination found by ACAT, up to
31 May 2020 as $70,357.
77. Importantly, Mr Sykes’ instructions were to assess what a “viable” car
dealership could expect to earn, and his report assumes that the car dealership
he is assessing is a viable business. There was some dispute between the parties
as to what a ‘viable’ business meant in this context, and Mr Sykes’ report does
not clearly address this. Under cross-examination, Mr Sykes suggested it meant
a business with all the approvals needed to commence operations, but that is not
evident on the documentation.
78. Mr Sykes also did not address the applicant’s particular characteristics or
whether the applicant himself was likely to possess the qualities needed to be
successful in the used car sales business. The applicant argued that it is not
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi within Mr Sykes' expertise to comment on the competency of the applicant to
work as a car dealer, and nor was it within the competency of the respondent’s
expert, Mr Green. The applicant submitted, instead, that it was for the Tribunal
to make such findings, based on the medical evidence, though the starting point
should be to accept Sykes' methodology and calculations, and apply reductions,
if appropriate.
79. The applicant’s other witness, Mr Nachev gave evidence about the second-hand
car industry in the ACT. His view was that a car dealership can be a profitable
business:20
…if the person setting up or managing the business is committed,
motivated and customer service focused. The profits can range from
$10,000 to $15,000 a month with a stock of an average 30 cars in stock. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
This would be considered a small dealership.
80. Mr Nachev said that he was not aware of any incidence in the last ten years
where a used car business had failed. Some car yards had closed down but
others were opening. He had not heard of any car yards closing recently.
However, he could not comment on the applicant’s prospects specifically:21
So obviously, as I said, it's depending on the person with the patience, the
way he wants to run, the way he wants to interact with other dealers and
learn the industry. So I can't tell you if he's going to succeed or not,
because obviously it's depending on the stock you've got. If you've got a
very desirable car, anybody will buy it from anywhere in Australia. If
20 Witness statement of Petar Nachev dated 26 August 2019
you've got, like, a very bad car which is smashed, which is scratched up,
it's not good, it's not popular in the market, nobody will touch it. So it's all
depending on the scenario of how you're marketing your stock as well,
and as I said earlier in our conversation, if you know which car is more
desirable on the market, then you target these sort of cars, can guarantee
you can succeed, but if you buy a car that nobody want, then you'd be
hardly selling one car a month. I can't make judge, and say if he's going
to succeed without knowing what sort of car he's going to buy. And
obviously you mentioned he's going to buy lower priced cars. Actually
they're the ones that are easy to sell and they're the one you make less …
So that's - the most important thing is, I guess, in my experience, if you
buy the car right in the first place and you've got a nice presentable
car,…22
81. A key point in Mr Nachev’s evidence, which is consistent also with Mr Green’s,
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! and with the applicant’s own business case, is the importance of buying the
right vehicles for resale. The applicant gave evidence on this point, and
emphasised his interest in vehicles, his experience purchasing for his own
purposes, his familiarity within online sales (eg. carsales.com.au) and
identifying bargains on those websites, and contacts he has at Pickles Auction
House, amongst other sources.
82. In response to the claim for non-economic loss, the respondents relied on the
report of Mr Paul Green, Director, Forensic Accounting at Vincent dated
22 June 2020 (Green Report). The Green Report was prepared in response to
the Sykes Report.
83. Mr Green’s report dealt explicitly with the issue of whether the busines was
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
likely to be viable and successful. He set out several of factors that he
considered important for the success if a second-hand motor vehicle business,
concluding that “skill and expertise or management” and the capital to fund
inventory as the key determinate of the viability of a second-hand car
dealership. He concluded that there was no evidence of either of these being
met, and hence that he did not consider the business viable.
84. Mr Green also questioned the cash flow assumptions used by the applicant in
his business case. Mr Green considered that the applicant’s cashflow projections
showed the proposed business outperforming industry norms, which he
submitted cast doubt on their reliability.
85. Mr Green’s report was well referenced and set out the assumptions that
underlay it. He answered questions frankly, as did Mr Sykes. I have no reason to
doubt the credibility of either expert, or that of Mr Nachev.
The approach calculating economic loss
86. The decision of the High Court in Malec v J. C. Hutton Pty Ltd [1990] HCA 20
(Malec) is the leading authority of ‘loss of chance’ damages. In Malec, the High
Court opined that the probability of a future event required an adjustment by the
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! court in its award of damages to reflect that degree of probability. 23
87. The key starting point for the consideration of Mr Sykes' report it that it was
premised on the assumption that the business was viable. I take that to mean that
Mr Skyes’ report sets out what a fully operational business, established in
accordance with the applicant’s business plan, with all regulatory requirements
in place, could expect to turnover if moderately successful. I am satisfied, on
this basis, that such a business would turnover a modest profit of about $70,357
in its first two years of operation.
88. However, the applicant does not have a viable, operational business. There is no
guarantee he could establish one, even assuming all his assumptions were
correct. As the High Court made clear in Malec:
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
if the law is to take into account future or hypothetical events in assessing
damages, it can only do so in terms of the degree of probability of those
24
events occurring.
89. It is these contingencies, the things that may compromise the viability of the
business, that Mr Green’s report addresses.
90. Accordingly, I do not find the evidence of the experts to be irreconcilable.
Rather, Mr Sykes’ report deals with the expected profit of a viable used car
sales business. Mr Green's report addresses viability.
23 See also, KS and XT v Calvary Health Care ACT trading as Calvary Hospital and Dr Andrew Foote
[2018] ACTSC 84
24 Malec v J. C. Hutton Pty Ltd [1990] HCA 20 at [7] per (Deane, Gaudron and McHugh JJ)
91. I am satisfied based on the evidence of Mr Nachev and Mr Sykes that the
applicant had a reasonable prospect of running a successful business, and that
the denial decision denied him the opportunity to do this.
92. However, having accepted that, I must make an appropriate discount to reflect
that the business, and the profit, is not guaranteed but rather aspirational. What I
am really assessing is the value of the applicant’s “loss of a chance”25 to
establish a viable business.
93. As was observed by the High Court in Malec:
Il Austell AustLll Aus
If the law is to take account of future or hypothetical events in assessing
damages, it can only do so in terms of the degree of probability of those events
occurring26
This is not, and cannot be, a precise science, so much as consideration of what
evidence is available to make an assessment.
94. The starting point is the business plan and the cashflow summary. These are
hypothetical, and the respondent has submitted that I should give them little
weight. While I agree with the respondent that they should not be elevated to a
level of certainty, to give them no weight would be to deny the applicant the
possibility of establishing that his business could have been successful, which
would in turn make it impossible for the applicant to obtain damages for his lost
opportunity. Mr Sykes has accepted the business plan and the cashflow Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
summary as a basis for his report, and I accept that report.
95. Turning to other factors, when determining the issue of a loss of chance, as was
noted in Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Guo (1997) 191 CLR
559 at 575, the applicant’s past conduct is one of the key considerations:
Determining whether there is a real chance that something will occur
requires an estimation of the likelihood that one or more events will give
rise to the occurrence of that thing. In many, if not most cases,
determining what is likely to occur in the future will require findings as to
what has occurred in the past because what has occurred in the past is
likely to be the most reliable guide as to what will happen in the future.
25 Transcript of proceedings 28 July 2020 page 93
26 Malec at [7]
96. Mr Green’s report also indicates the importance of past experience in the
operation of a comparable business as key criteria for success. The complainant
has no experience in the car sales industry. He had, at best, bought cars and
done them up for a hobby. There is also no evidence that he had ever
successfully run a small business before. This lack of direct experience is a
consideration that decreases his chances of establishing a viable business.
97. However, evidence suggests the applicant has some business and management
experience, albeit mixed. He has managed two building projects, and although
two of those went over budget (possibly for reasons beyond his control), and
one [AustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! went over time, the projects were completed. He has also maintained
successful employment in other industries, while undertaking private projects.
While this shows motivation, not experience, no doubt determination and
initiative are valuable traits.
tLI 98. Mr Green opines that the cashflow summary part of the business plan represents
an optimistic position. However, no alternative has been suggested.
99. Mr Nachev’s evidence suggests that opportunities exist in the market and used
car businesses are regularly successful.
100. However, while I accept Mr Sykes’ report as broadly reflecting how the
business will operate if established in accordance with the cashflow statement
and business case, I am not convinced that all the assumptions in those
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
documents are practical or sustainable. At the very least, they increase the risk
associated with the enterprise.
101. For example, the business plan does not explicitly allow for rent. The applicant
justified this by explaining that he had a good-will arrangement with an
associate, whereby he may use a vacant lot owned by an associate in exchange
for a notional payment. While this is a significant boon to the applicant, the
arrangement carries a degree of risk as the terms are uncertain and it cannot be
enforced at law. It is not, for example, clear how long this arrangement is
expected to last, and while I do not doubt the applicant’s faith in his friendship,
there must be a risk that if a better deal comes along, the yard owner will take
the paying option over the less profitable arrangements with the applicant. The
yard owner did not give evidence confirming the arrangement and there are no
written terms.
102. The lot is currently without electricity. To his credit, the applicant had clearly
thought about this and explained how he intended to manage during the startup
phase without electricity: 27
The detailing would have been done by me but I didn't need a vacuum
cleaner as such, because I could just drive down to the carwash and pay
$4 and use their vacuum cleaner there and then bring the car back. There
is water on the site, so I would have been able to do the rest of the
detailing myself as I've got experience. So the cars would primarily be
detailed, cleaned, photos taken of. Then I would have done a condition
report, which I've got a sample here if anyone wants to see.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
103. Still, the sustainability of that arrangement is not clear. The lack of electricity
would, at the very least, restrict hours of operation to daylight hours, which
further limits the time available to the applicant to operate his venture. This is a
concern given, as discussed below, he intends to continue working full time
hours in the public service.
104. Other problems were also identified by Mr Green and by the respondent’s
counsel. No are no contingency arrangements for warranty obligations that may
need to be met. It is not clear if insurance is properly calculated. There is no
objective evidence that the applicant had pre-approval for a business loan
(although no reason to doubt it will be approved either) and it is not clear how
the initial purchase of vehicles will be funded – although I do note that the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
applicant appears to have some start-up capital by reason of having obtained a
voluntary redundancy of just under $50,000.
105. There is no convincing evidence before the tribunal of the basis for the
assumption that the applicant will sell four cars a month. As noted above, all
parties appear to agree that the key criteria will be the applicant’s ability to
identify and purchase the right vehicles, at a good price, and then value add in
some way. In terms of sourcing the right vehicles, the applicant relies upon his
knowledge of the cars, gained through his hobbies and interests, and upon his
own skills and contacts, particularly his conducts with Pickles Auction House. I
27 Transcript of proceedings 27 July 2020 page 36
have no reason to doubt that the applicant has a good knowledge of the car
market, and accept that he is able to recognise bargains when available on the
internet or from private sellers. However, none of this evidence addresses the
time it will take him to do this, a significant consideration in light of his plan to
continue alternative employment full time.
106. I am less convinced of the value of this contacts at Pickles. As I understand it,
the applicant contends that staff at Pickles, who he knows, will give him
preferential access to vehicles. I am unsure why staff would do this, and no
Pickles staff member gave evidence confirming the claim. Again, it may well be
that the applicant has close associates will give him some assistance, but even if
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! this is the case, there is inherent risk in a business plan that requires good will
relationships, particularly where there may be conflicting commercial interests.
Perhaps this is not unusual in the industry, but in the absence of that evidence I
cannot give much weight to this claim. Given the importance placed by all the
witnesses on sourcing the correct vehicles, this lack of supporting evidence for
this claim is a significant problem for the applicant’s case.
107. I am also uncertain what, if any, benefit the applicant could derive from his
assertion that he has contacts with the Road Transport Authority. It would be
stretching credulity to suggest a public servant would give him favourable
treatment, but perhaps he may be able to source advice or guidance on what
issues typically arise and how to ensure a car passes all the relevant roadworthy
Must!Il AustLll AustLII AustLi
tests.
108. I must also consider whether the applicant has had an opportunity to mitigate his
loss and adjust any award accordingly. The applicant says that it was
unnecessary to take his primary income into account, because he was always
intending to operate the business in addition to continuing to work his usual
occupation. He explained that the:
…original concept was that I was starting this on the side as a side
business with my fulltime work still being done by me. It wasn't a plan that
I'm going to quit the public service and run this fulltime. I think I made
that clear in my business plan, and also in my personal statement
provided to the Commissioner for Fair Trading. 28
109. He explained how he saw the project working as follows:
How I saw that working was that I had a yard which is [an associate’s]s
yard. I was going to collect cars. … I was planning to keep 13, … I would
purchase the vehicles. It had a custom, sort of unique, tailored business
approach to it where I would clean the cars, detail them. Everything was
outsourced and I've made a note of that in my business plan as well.
What I was planning on doing is, as I mentioned, on weekends I would
clean, polish the cars, get them ready, have the roadworthy done, the
condition report done, put them on Facebook, my Facebook Marketplace
page, with condition report, and then it was viewing by appointment only.
So that would filter down serious buyers, because they would see a
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi condition report, they would see photos of the car, they would know that
it's got a roadworthy and there would be a dealership licence attached
with it. So when I say 'appointment only', you work 9.00 till 5.00. 29
110. And in terms of maintaining his full-time employment:
…being a public servant, I was flexible with my hours. I could have
started at 7.30 and finished at 4.00. So - you're allowed to answer your
phone while you're work and check emails. So if someone was serious on
a car and I got an inquiry, I would make a time with them after-hours to
go and see them on site and show them the range of cars that I had.30
111. This plan is contingent upon the applicant being granted permission to operate a
business while engaged in a full-time public-sector employment. There is
perhaps some risk that permission to do so may not be granted. There is also a
question as to how the applicant will manage not just the mechanics of
preparing the purchased vehicles for sale and showing them to customers, but Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
also managing book keeping and accountancy work, liaising with the RTA, and
searching carsales and other websites for good deals, while working full time.
112. I must also consider, to some degree, applicant’s mental health, including his
reaction to previously stressful events such as managing his house. I do not
place great weight on this factor, particularly as there is no medical evidence
addressing this issue, but given the applicant’s stated intention is to operate both
this business and continue his full-time employment, the stress this may cause,
28 Transcript of proceedings 27 July 2020 page 35
29 Transcript of proceedings 27 July 2020 page 37
30 Transcript of proceedings 27 July 2020 page 38
and the effect on that on his mental health, is risk factor that I need to at least
consider.
113. For the reasons set out above, I am satisfied that the applicant likely would have
made a profit of $74,000, had the business been successful and viable. I am
satisfied he had a reasonable chance of establishing a business, but the risks
inherent in achieving this were significant and some of his assumptions appear
optimistic as best and tenuously reliant upon the goodwill or friends and
associates, none of whom attended to give evidence or confirm their
beneficence. The Tribunal applies a 60% reduction to the estimated profit to
allow for the vicissitudes of life – resulting in an anticipated profit of $29,600.
+LILAustLIISAIstLII AustLII Austi
114. I accept the evidence of the applicant that he intended to pay the profit from the
business to himself as a dividend. This would have left minimal monies to
expand.
115. No party may submissions about the effect of company or income tax on the
income that the applicant would have earned but for the respondent’s wrongful
act. I have made no adjustments for it. The applicant will need to seek his own
advice on the taxation of the economic loss component of this decision.
116. I decline to make any orders for past expenses as they were not particularised,
not for future medical treatment as there is no evidence before me that the
applicant will require any.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Interest
117. The applicant made a claim for interest under the Court Procedures Rules.
118. In Kovac No 2, Presidential Member Spender observed:
The Court Procedures Rules do not bind the tribunal although section 24
of the ACAT Act requires the tribunal, when making rules in relation to
the practice and procedure of the tribunal, to consider rules dealing with
similar matters under the Court Procedures Rules. The Tribunal is not
aware of a precedent in the ACT where interest has been claimed in a
discrimination matter. However interest has been awarded in some
Federal Court discrimination matters. Interest has also been awarded in
the Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal (QCAT) although there
is an express provision in the Queensland Anti-Discrimination Act
1991empowering QCAT to award interest on an amount of compensation.
In McCauley v Club Resort Holdings Pty Ltd (No 2) Member Gordon
differentiated between an award of interest for non-financial loss (which
he considered was not available because it would ‘over compensate” the
applicant) and an award of interest for financial loss where interest is
available. Member Gordon relied upon the reasoning of the High Court in
MBP (SA) Pty Ltd v. Gogic that the reason for an award of interest is to
compensate a plaintiff for the loss or detriment which he or she has
suffered by being kept out of his or her money during the relevant period.
There is no express power given to ACAT to award interest under the
Discrimination Act or the HRC Act, but the tribunal does have power to
determine its own procedure under section 23 of the ACAT Act if there is
no procedure prescribed under the Act or an authorising law. Section 19
of the ACAT Act recognises that a claim for interest may be made in a
civil dispute application. Under the tribunal’s procedural directions there
is a power to award interest where the sum claimed is liquidated amount.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! In this case part of the sums awarded – the special damages of $30,468.70
– is liquidated because the amount can be ascertained by a simple
calculation or other positive data. The Tribunal orders that interest is
payable on this sum from the date that the special damages were incurred
i.e. 3 November 2014.31
119. A review of a selection of Federal Circuit Court and Federal Court decisions
shows a variable approach where interest is awarded. For example, in Wattle v
Kirkland & Anor (No 2) [2002] FMCA 135, Driver FM noted the lack of any
specified right or rate in the Federal jurisdiction, and applied a pre-judgment
interest rate calculated by reference to a small reduction in the post-judgment
rate. He applied the same approach in Mayer v Australian Nuclear Science &
Technology Organisation [2003] FMCA 209, but increased the interest rate to
applicable in that case to reflect the rising interest rates at the time. The Court
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Procedure Rules are an appropriate equivalent in this jurisdiction.
120. A broader approach was taken by Madgwick J in Clarke v Catholic Education
Office [2004] FCA 1085 at 360-61. His Honour awarded $20,000 for hurt and
humiliation plus a $6,000 “allowance for interest on three quarters of that sum”.
His Honour does not set out the basis upon which this was calculated.
121. In Qantas Airways Limited v Gama [2008] FCAFC 69 the Full Court of the
Federal Court confirmed, on appeal, that under the Federal Act the amount of
interest awarded was discretionary.
31 At [85] – [86]
122. The Procedural Directions referenced in Kovac No 2 have been replaced with
the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Procedures Rules 2020, but the
relevant rules (101 and 102) relate only civil disputes, and this is not one of
those. To the extent that the Tribunal can award interest, that power must lie in
section 23 of the ACAT Act and the guiding principles in section 53E(3) of the
HRC Act.
123. The medical evidence of Dr Saboisky indicates that the injury suffered by the
applicant made him “ focused on getting justice” and he “ruminates
excessively about what has happened.” 32 In calculating the non-economic loss, I
have taken account of the effect of the delayed justice on the applicant’s
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! wellbeing and that is reflected in the compensation awarded.
124. Consistent with Kovac No 2, and having regard to how other jurisdictions have
awarded interest in situations involving lost income, I am satisfied that is
appropriate to award some interest on the potential lost income of $29,600.
Interest under the Court Procedures Rules, assuming income as per Mr Sykes’s
report, adjusted as per this decision would be $2166.31.
Orders
1. The respondent must not repeat the unlawful act of taking into account the
applicant’s irrelevant criminal record in any future licence application made
by the applicant for a motor vehicle dealers licence under the Traders
Licensing Act 2016. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
2. The respondent is to pay the applicant
(a) General damages of $15,000;
(b) $29,600 for economic loss arising from loss of opportunity; and
(c) $2162.99 interest.
………………………………..
Presidential Member H Robinson
32 Psychiatrist report by Dr Saboisky dated 6 September 2019 page 3
Date(s) of hearing 28 October 2019
29 October 2019
27 July 2020
28 July 2020
Solicitors for the Applicant: Ms Meller, Bradley Allen Love Lawyers
Solicitors for the Respondent: Ms Belcher, ACT Government Solicitor
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi