UstLll AustLII AustLI
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
CITATION: Julian Moufarrige and Shane McNamee v Peter Vickers and Susan
Vickers [2008] ACTRTT (15)
RT of 319 of 2008
Catchwords: Compensation for breach of quiet enjoyment and failure to repair by
landlord.
Tribunal: +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust A. Anforth, Member
Date: 26 September 2008
Julian Moufarrige and Shane McNamee
(Applicant/Tenant)
AND:
Peter Vickers and Susan Vickers
(Respondent/Landlord)
DECISION
Tribunal :A. Anforth, Member
Date :4 July 2008
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Decision :
The Respondent is to pay the Applicant the sum of $4700.00 being compensation for
failure to repair defects arising during the tenancy; failure to deliver premises in a
reasonable state of repair at the commencement of the tenancy; and breach of quiet
enjoyment.
The above amount is to be paid on or before 3rd day of August 2008.
…………………………….
Member
Julian Moufarrige and Shane McNamee
(Applicant/Tenant)
AND
Peter Vickers and Susan Vickers
(Respondent/Landlord)
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. The present dispute concerns a tenancy at unit 50 Waterfront, 9 Eastlake Parade
Kingston Act. The premises are new luxury premises and the Applicant was the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! first occupant of those premises.
2. The tenancy commenced on 7 December 2007 at a rent of $1250 per week and a
bond of $5000.00 was paid.
3. By way of brief overview, the premises suffered a range of significant defects
from the start of the tenancy which required repairs. The landlords authorised
those repairs to be carried out over the period from the commencement of the
tenancy and some of these repairs were ongoing when the tenants filed their
application in the Tribunal on 15 April 2008. The defects themselves caused the
tenants substantial loss of amenity and loss of quiet enjoyment over this period.
This loss was exacerbated by the fact that tradesmen were at the premises carrying
out the various repairs for 51 days in this period. The tenants lodged a claim with
the Tribunal on 15 April 2008 in which they sought an order to terminate the fixed
term lease on the basis of this loss of amenity and quiet enjoyment and to be
\ust!Il AustLI AustLI
relevantly compensated.
4. Annexed to the application was an attachment which set out the relevant
chronology of events. The attachment read:
We the tenants of 50/9 Eastlake Pde believe the Landlord to be in breach of the lease. Below is
a list of activities and maintenance that have significantly impeded our us e and enjoyment of
this property.
The main issues being
*Oven reported as faulty in first week of tenancy. (Oven non operational). Oven not replaced
for another 13 weeks. Owner waited on replacement under warranty
*Floorboards in Dining, lounge, and corridor significantly bowed. Issue reported on ingoing
inventory. They were removed by the builder in the latter part of December and not re-laid
until the end of February.
*Whole row of tiles ripped up on the balcony in the first week of March. This was done to test
for leaks into apartments below. Tiles still not replaced.
*Fly screens missing for sliding doors in the West facing living area, reported on ingoing
inspection. Not replaced until the last week of January. There are serious heat issues with the
living area. Sheer curtains have little impact on screening the sun, as a res ult of not being able
to open our sliding doors to circulate air we had to run our air-conditioning 24 hours during a
very mild summer
*Water poured out of the air-conditioning unit in the ceiling flooding the kitchen. This required
a piece of gyprock 1 metre by 1.5 metres adjacent to the kitchen be removed. Builder has said
that everything will be fixed by Wednesday next week. Approx 6 weeks for work to be
completed. We denied access this week to work men for personal reasons.
I believe all of the five above mentioned maintenance issues to be in breach of the standard
residential tenancy terms, clause 57, under the heading Lessor to make repairs.
A ll of these repairs have or are taking well over 4 weeks without any agreement with us the
tenant to extend the period of maintenance.
Further issues that have had a cumulative negative effect on the tenancy
*2nd week in March, Feature insert on wall collapses and breaks ornamental vase. Repaired
within 1 week
*Second week of tenancy, laundry floods as a result of a concrete slab blocking the air-
conditioner overflow, repaired straight away.
*February, Builder conducts acoustic tests on our air-conditioning system due to noise
complaints from other residents
*Concierge organizes acoustic tests for our unit. Asks us to put felt on the bottom of our
dining room chairs and on our chairs on the balcony to dampen noise transference to
apartments below.
*March, We become fully aware of noise transference issues within the development when the
vacant unit next to us is occupied. They can clearly hear my television and stereo when played at a
tLIIAustLIJ normal level and we can clearly hear their piano as if we were in the same room. I can also clearly
hear them walking up and down the stairs and walking in their bedroom. This is highly disruptive
as the noise from next door is heard at its loudest from my bedroom.
March, Both my car and my flat mate's car are broken into, with windows being smashed. Not the
fault of the Landlord but a poor reflection on security. There have been three occasions and many
cars broken into sinceour tenancy commenced.
On the 6 t h March after being told the Landlord wishes to place the apartment on the market I sent
Gabrielle Hume of PRO an email. I requested that we be let out of the lease or be compensated..
Our tenancy to that point had been a revolving door for trades people. 1 was frustrated and informed
her that we would not pay any further rent until we had a reply. We actually have continued to pay
rent. The request to sell was seen as provocative given the floorboards had just been replaced, after
approximately 13 weeks of being in ill repair. AUSEL !!
March 7 Gabrielle replies to my letter and informs me she is waiting on a report from the concierge
(concierge organizes maintenance in this development)
ASELII
Sat March 29 Frustrated at not receiving a response from PRD in relation to the maintenance report
from the concierge I meet with the Landlord at our mutual agreement in the apartment.
The landlord offers us a generous rent reduction from $l,250p/w to $950 p/w for three months. The
only catch is we are to provide unrestricted access to the selling agent.
We respond by asking for the offered rent reduction for four months, the equivalent of how long
we had been in the apartment and that we provide access every Saturday for several hours. I state
that it is our preference however, to be released from the lease.
I don't receive a response from the owner, so I email him letting him know that I would appreciate
a response in the next two days, as our rent is due.
An email from the landlord is received on Monday April 7th saying that he will be unable to have an
answer that quickly as he is busy with work and I will hear from either the selling agent or the
managing agent.
Time keeps ticking and, we have paid a further $10,864.00 since our initial request to be released or
compensated . We now want to be compensated for the disgraceful condition the apartment has
-. A.uctLll istLI AustLII AustLI
been in and the continued interruptions throughout our tenancy, as well as being released from the
lease. We had an option of renting far cheaper properties but our expectation was that for the
weekly rental of $1,250.00 per week this apartment would be an amazing place to live.... It has
been a horror story and more significant maintenance will be required to rectify the acoustic issues.
Finally I would like to conclude by saying I think the managing agent primarily has been fine
during our tenancy. The main issue I have with them is that they have not responded to us since
March 7 in Relation to a maintenance report.
5. The tenancy agreement and the emails of 6, 11, 31 March 2008 and 2, 7 April
2008 referred to above were annexed to the application.
" Austl
6. The landlord’s agent response on 7 March 2008 referred to above read in full:
I refer to your email to me of Thursday 6 March 2008 with the subject 50/9 Eastlake Parade and our
previous conversations in relation to your tenancy.
Unfortunately new developments can bring some initial teething problems and as you commented
these have been out of the lessors control.
Whilst I understand that you have had a number of tradespeople attend to your property, it is my
understanding that these repairs have been undertaken within Clause 82 of The Schedule: Standard
tLIIAustLIJ Residential Tenancy Terms. The lessor and this office have worked endlessly to have all repairs
undertaken within a timely manner, unfortunately some do take time when we are locked into warranty
bookings etc. It is my understanding that there are no maintenance items outstanding with the exception
of the light fitting that you have just reported. This has been logged with the concierge for repair.
I have spoken with Adam Johnston from the concierge's office who claims that at no time have they
entered your apartment without your approval. He will supply a log from the alarm company to verify
this. I have also asked him for a detailed list of all works carried out on your unit for the Lessors
reference. As I told you in our last conversation the lessor and this office have not been made aware of
the tradespeople entering your unit for testing etc. I will ask the concierge to contact me in the first
instance should it be necessary in the future so that I can monitor this more closely.
The approval for a spa bath is the Body Corporates'. We forwarded on your request, but as yet have not
has a response. This office has followed this request up with the Body Corporate on a number of AUSEL !!
occasions, I have been told that the executive committee are still in discussions on this matter we will
advise you as soon as the Body Corporate makes a decision on the request.
Your statement "We will pay no further rent until we have received a response" contravenes the ASELII
Schedule: Standard Residential Tenancy Terms, as I am sure you understand as the Director of a Real
Estate Agency. Your next rent in the amount of $5,432.00 is due on 10th March 2008. Should your rent
not be receipted in this office by the date you will be in breach of Clause 26 and as such may receive a
Notice to Remedy, we will then seek Lessors instructions should you not remedy the breach.
Clause 66 of The Schedule: Standard Residential Tenancy Terms states that you are to Observe rules of
the body corporate. The House Rules for The Waterfront clearly states the "Residents must not create
any noise in an apartment in on Common Property likely to interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of
other residents, especially between 9pm and 8am". The Rule goes on to state that "Common sources of
noise are music, loud voices, washing machines, dryers, slamming doors, dragging or moving furniture
especially on hard surfaces such as on the winter garden etc. " If your neighbours feel that you have not
adhered to this rule, than they are entitled to make a complaint, no matter what complex.
In relation to the request for Bill Lyristakis from Berkley's Real Estate to take a buyer through your
unit. Apart from the fact that I discussed this with you and you agreed, the lessor is entitled to sell the
property at any time. Whilst timing is unfortunate given the issues you have had I have been instructed
by the lessor to organise access for him. The contract is being prepared at present then I will confirm a
suitable time with you.
As you are aware an energy rating is required for the contract. ACTNOW inspect have requested
access to prepare the EER. Can you please authorise the release of your mobile number for this to
occur.
I will be in contact shortly once I have all information confirmed from the concierge. I will be out of the
office this week, should you have any queries please contact Jane Barrett of this office.
7. On 12 May 2008 the landlords filed a statement setting out their defence to the
claim made by the tenants. That statement read:
The maintenance list assupplied by the tenants is a true & correct reflection of the issues that they have
faced. These issues have been as a result of a new building project and totally out of the control of Mr &
Mrs Vickers.
Following a meeting with Mr Geny McCabe of Stocklands, as at 8th May 2008 all maintenance issues have
been deal with and there are no outstanding matters.
Mr Vickers met with Mr McNamee discussing all his issues and immediately offered compensation in the
order of $ 300.00 per week. Taking the rent from $ 1250 pw to $950 per week for the next 3 months. At
that time Mr Vickers was in a difficult financial situation and needed to place the property on the market.
This adjustment of rent was to further compensate them for the ongoing inconvenience.
Since that meeting Mr Vickers has sourced other options and the apartment will not be placed on the
tLIIAustLIJ market for sale.
With all maintenance complete and the apartment not for sale we request the Tribunal not issuea
Termination Order. The owners support compensation being awarded to the tenants as already offered March
29th
.
Mr & Mrs Vickers regret the disruption that both tenants have endured and thank them for their co
operation with PBS Builders. Through out this period both the owners and this office have liaised with the
Concierge, Stocklands & PBS Builders to monitor the works and encourage all parties to have utter respect
for the tenants. We trust that now they will be able to enjoy Penthouse living.
8. The matter was listed before the Tribunal on 16 May 2008 before a differently
constituted Tribunal. On that day Mr McNamee appeared on behalf of both
tenants and Ms Hume, real estate agent appeared on behalf of the landlords. The
matter was adjourned to 19 may 2008 for hearing.
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLI AustLi
9. On 19 May 2008 Mr McNamee appeared for both tenants and Ms Hume appeared
for the landlords. Following a hearing of the parties the Tribunal found that the
landlords had breached the terms of the residential tenancy agreement by reason
of:
(a) the premises not being in a reasonable state of repairs at the
commencement of the tenant (prescribed term 54(1)(b) of the Act)
(b) the premises not being maintained in a reasonable state of repair during the
tenancy (prescribed term 55 of the Act)
(c) the disturbance to the tenants’ quiet enjoyment caused by the various
tradesmen carrying out repairs (prescribed term 52 of the Act).
10. The Tribunal was satisfied that the landlords’ breaches caused a substantial loss of
use of the premises and loss of quiet enjoyment by the tenant that justified the
termination of the tenancy and ordered pursuant to section 43 and prescribed term
90(a) of the Act that the tenancy be terminated as of 10am on the 30 June 2008.
AustLII AustLI
11. In coming to the above conclusion the Tribunal was particular, but not
exclusively, influence by the fact that the landlords’ tradesmen been present at the
premises for 51 days since the commencement of the lease on 7 December 2007 to
the filing of the application on 15 April 2008, and the fact that the tradesmen had
left the premises with very substantial holes in the floor at two points in the
premises in prominent traffic zones, each of which was easily big enough for the
tenants to fall into and potentially suffer serious harm. These holes were not
covered or guarded in any way. The Tribunal expressed its surprise that any
responsible landlords or tradesmen could or would allow such a dangerous
situation to exist from mid December 2007 to the end of February 2008.
12. The issue of the quantum of the tenants compensation was adjourned to a later
date with orders for the tenants to file and serve statements setting out the extent
of the inconvenience and distress they claim to have suffered.
JAustLIJ ^ustLII AustLII Austi 13. The tenants later filed their statements pertaining to the distress and inconvenience
suffered. The statement read:
Further to the ruling made in our favour relating to the Landlord being in breach of the tenancy
agreement. We wish to seek compensation for the significant disturbance relating to our capacity for quiet
enjoyment of the residence.
tLII The ruling primarily related to maintenance not being completed in a timely manner. The items of
maintenance were;
1) Stove faulty at the beginning of tenancy, 13 weeks to replace (Became aware of this in the first week of
tenancy during a dinner party that was duly cancelled). My flatmate uses an oven in normal
circumstances regularly so this was a source of great frustration.
2) Floor boards in dining, lounge and corridor Ripped up in mid December and not replaced until the end
of February. Approx 11 weeks to be replaced after being ripped up. This matter had a major impact on our
day-to-day activities in the apartment. Both my flat mate and I chose to restrict visits from our younger
nephews and nieces. We were concerned for there safety.
AUSEL !!
3) Fly screens missing on main living area sliding doors at the start of tenancy and not replaced until last
week of January. The apartment is North/West facing, only has sheer curtains and there are no other
windows in the room that open to release hot air. Even during a mild summer we were forced to use the
air-conditioning continuously otherwise the conditions were stifling. ASELII
4) 1 by 1.5 metre hole in ceiling caused by air conditioning leak. Reported second week in March work
substantially completed by the second week in May. Approx 9 weeks to be substantially completed. This
made the apartment look like a construction site for an unnecessary long period of time. The location of
the work adjacent to the kitchen is prominent.
5) Row of tiles ripped up on balcony in Early March not replaced until the middle of April. This work
added to the feeling that we were residing in a construction site. This maintenance issue mainly impacted
on us restricting visits by younger relatives.
There have been a host of other maintenance issues that have negatively affected our private enjoyment
that were also noted on our initial application as well.
When considering our claim for compensation we request you consider firstly the weekly rent we are
paying of $1,250 per week.. When we selected this property we planned to be able to entertain friends,
family and business colleagues in one of Canberra's most sought after locations, a prestigious penthouse
apartment overlooking the lake. Items 1,2 and 4 have made it completely out of the question to entertain,
impossible to enjoy for personal use and certainly more than stripped away any prestige associated with
justifying any where near the paid rent.
We also request you consider that items 1,2,and 3 were not in working condition, over the Christmas
period. Both my flat mate and I were anxious to entertain our respective families who were very excited
to have Xmas at a 'beautiful' new venue. We were unable to provide the penthouse for either family's
Xmas.
Our private enjoyment has also been significantly disrupted not only by the disgraceful state of repair of
the property but also by the magnitude and intensity of the days when maintenance has been required.
There have been a total of 51 days of maintenance at the date of the first hearing, more by the time this
compensation request is heard.
My flat mate and I are both involved in the running of our own businesses. This allows us in normal
circumstances to spend time working from home as well as the freedom to come home during the day to
relax during the week, (we both work weekends).
We have found the monotonous regularity of the maintenance overwhelming, highly stressful and have
both had to significantly compromise our routines to fit in with trades so we would finally have a
habitable residence. This has been the case for the entirety of our lease.
We wish you to consider the cumulative impact of the ongoing maintenance, the poor state of repair of
the apartment and the inconvenience and cost of departing early from the lease when making your ruling
for compensation.
tLIIAustLIJ
14. In response to the tenants statement immediately above, the landlords’ agent filed
the following statement:
Response to the Compensation claim for50/9 Eastlake Parade Kingston.
The lessor is extrem ely disappointed that the Tribunal issued a Termination Order and that he has
be cited as in breac h of the tenancy agreem e nt due to the fact that all issues were out of his control
and attend ed to by the reside nt builde rs. In no way did he not respo nd immediately to all noted
issues.
In light of the Termina tion Order the Lesso r reque sts the relea se of the tenanc y agreem e nt is ample
compe nsation and no furthe r be issued. It should be noted:
ustLII AustLI AustLI
1-The events as listed by the tenants were over a 4 month period and did not occur at the same time.
This there fore did not rende r the property in a 'disgrac e ful state of repair " as indica ted by the
tenants.
2-Floorbo ards in the living room — the Tenant at the hearing said "there were 5 to 6 floorboa rds
lifted. The internal area of the 2 storey Pent hou se apartm ent is 190m2 whi ch theref ore is quite
insignific ant. They were not in a dange rous state as noted by the tenant.
3-Flysc re en s were at the property - the railing to the base was missing. This was repair ed . To
release the hot air one simpl y neede d to open the glass door — Ducte d air conditioning is includ ed
in the apartm ent and to be the most effective in all areas you would keep the door dosed.
4-Air conditio ning leak - repaire d promptly allowin g for the plaste r to dry etc — once again out of
the owne rs control.
5-A row of tiles lifted on the terrac e again st a wall to chec k drainin g - the terra ce is 205m2 —
quite insignific ant given the area, It should be noted the Lessor provid ed a $50,000 Stainle ss Steel
BBQ unit with sink storag e etc for the tenants enjoym ent on the 205m2 terrac e.
The Lessor was disapp ointe d that his brand new luxury apartm ent experie nce d initial teething
issues;. With the exce ptio n of the flyscre en installation all occurrin g after the tenan cy commenc ed .
An owner surely could only be considere d in breac h if a maintena nc e issue was reporte d and not
acted on. Each & every item brought to the Lessors attention was acted upon promptly, as confir m e d
by the tenant at the hearin g. It was unfortun ate that some took time to remed y with supplier s
being shutdow n over the Xmas break .
It should be noted that the not installe d flyscre en was pointed out to Mr McNa me e at the time of his
initial inspec tion of the prope rty prior to signing a tenan cy agreem e nt and he was not worried about
it, nothin g was due t0 the installe d. He agree d to occupy befor e it was repaire d…
15. The matter was next listed before the Tribunal on 4 July 2008 to determine the
issue of compensation. On that occasion Mr McNamee appeared for both tenants
and Ms Hume appeared for the landlords.
16. After hearing the parties the Tribunal awarded the tenants the sum of $4,700.00 in
compensation calculated on a comparative verdicts basis as follows:
(a) For 13 weeks of the faulty stove
$300.00
(b) For 10 weeks of the dangerous holes in the floor
$2000.00
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! (c) For 6 weeks of non flyscreen
$200.00
(d) For 9 weeks delay in repairing the leading roof
$100.00
(e) For 8 weeks of investigations and repairs to terrace
$100.00
(f) For the repeated visits from the tradesman and their disturbance
$2000.00
17. On 9 July 2008 the landlords’ agent sought reasons for decision restricted to a
“breakdown of the compensation …awarded”.
18. During the course of both hearings the Tribunal explained to the parties the
relevant statutory provisions and principles of law it relied upon. The relevant
statutory provisions are:
52. The lessor shall not cause or permit any interference with the reasonable peace, comfort or
privacy of the tenant in the use by the tenant of the premises. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
54(1) At the start of the tenancy, the lessor must ensure that the premises, including furniture,
fittings and appliances (unless excluded from the tenancy agreement), are—
(a) fit for habitation; and
(b) reasonably clean; and
(c) in a reasonable state of repair; and
(d) reasonably secure.
55.(1) The lessor shall maintain the premises in a reasonable state of repair having regard to
their condition at the commencement of the Tenancy Agreement. The tenan t shall notify the
lessor of any need for repairs.
57. Subject to clause 55, the lessor shall make repairs, other than urgent repairs, within 4
weeks of being notified of the need for the repairs (unless otherwise agreed).
19. The landlords’ duty at the commencement of the tenancy is to hand over the
premises in a “reasonable” state of repair (prescribed term 54(1)(c)). The adjective
“reasonable” qualifies the “state of repair of the premises” and does not qualify
the nature of the actions or endeavours of the landlord to carry out the repairs
(Moore v Tidy unreported SASC 13/8/92 Rhodes J; Dupont v Lawrence (1997)
NSWRT 213). Prescribed term 54(1)(c) imports an objective test concerning the
actual state of the premises irrespective of the landlords motivation or efforts.
20. The landlords’ duty at the commencement of the tenancy is to ensure that all
defects that are detectable by reasonable inspection (“patent defects”) are
remedied prior to the premises being handed over. Prior to the commencement of
the tenancy the landlords are not required to have the premises inspected by
relevant tradesmen in a search for defects, but the landlords are required to
remedy any defects which are apparent on a reasonable inspection by them or
their agent (Jones v Bartlett [2000] HCA 56; Northern Sandblasting v Harris
(1997) 188 CLR 313; NSW v Watton [1998] NSWSC 589; Gration v C Gillian
Investments P/L [2005] QCA 184; Francis v Lewis [2003] NSWCA 152 ).
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! 21. In the present case three of the five defects of which the tenants complained (see
paragraph 16 above) were apparent on a reasonable inspection by the landlords or
their agent at the commencement of the tenancy. The flyscreen was not present at
all, the floor boards were visibly warped and the stove was non functional. In
relation to the stove the defects would have been apparent upon the non-technical
act of testing the oven to see if it worked prior to handing over the premises.
22. The landlords’ duty to repair defects arising during the tenancy (“latent defects”)
commences upon the landlords’ receiving notice of the development of the defect
(Jones v Bartlett [2000] HCA 56; Northern Sandblasting v Harris (1997) 188
CLR 313; Ahluwalia v Robinson [2003] NSWCA 175; Sakauo v Williams [2005]
NSWCA 405; Weeks v Bond [1997] QCA 349). In the present case the defects
relating to the airconditioning in the ceiling and the tiles on the balcony fall into
this category.
23. Once the landlords are put on notice of the defects arising during the tenancy,
prescribed term 57 allows the landlords 4 weeks to carry out the repairs. In the
present case neither the repairs to the ceiling arising from the leaking air Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
conditioner nor the tiles on the balcony were repaired within 4 weeks.
24. If the landlords are given the benefit of the doubt to the effect that the defects to
the stove, floor boards and flyscreen were not known to the landlord at the
commencement of the tenancy and were not apparent to reasonable inspection at
that time, then those defects must then be treated as latent defects arising during
the tenancy, from the time the tenants put the landlords on notice of the existence
of the defects. The landlords then have 4 weeks to carry out the repairs. In the case
of each of these defects the landlords took much longer than 4 weeks from the
date of notice to carry out the repairs. To this extent not much turns on whether
these defects are categorised as “patent” or “latent” because the landlords are still
in breach of their contractual obligations.
25. The landlords’ case is essentially that defects are to be expected in new premises
and once the defects were brought to the landlords’ attention they moved as
expeditiously as circumstances permitted to carry out the repairs. The landlords
pointed to delays in obtaining approval from warranty insurers for the stove,
delays attributable to the tradesmen, delays attributable to Christmas and defective
work on the part of the tradesmen. The Tribunal explained to the landlords’
representatives that these considerations went only to the reasonableness of the
landlords’ efforts to carry out the repairs which was not a relevant consideration.
The contractual duty to repair is one of strict liability not requiring any element of
fault or negligence on the landlords’ part (Robinson v Fretin [2006] NSWSC 598;
Dupont (supra)) modified only by such qualifications as are found in the Act and
residential tenancy agreement. As indicated above the qualification of
“reasonableness” in prescribed term 54(1)(c) does not qualify the landlords
conduct or efforts to effect the repairs.
26. In relation to the breach of quiet enjoyment caused by the presence of the
tradesmen, the landlords contended that because the tradesmen were attending to
repairs that any disturbance caused to the tenants by the tradesmen could not be a
breach of prescribed term 52. Unfortunately for the landlords the Full Federal
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Court in Worrall v Commissioner for Housing of Act [2002] FCAFC 127
determined otherwise on the principle that each of the prescribed terms of the
tenancy agreement are independent and if the landlords’ repairs detracts from the
tenants’ quiet enjoyment then the tenants have been deprived of the most
important right that the tenancy agreement conferred upon them.
A. Anforth
26th September 2008
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi