ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
THE HURST-MEYERS CHARITY LTD ABN 696 111 166 119 v
WELLINGS & ANOR (Residential Tenancies) [2020] ACAT 102
RT 626/2018
RT 762/2018
Catchwords: RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES whether the second
–
respondent was properly represented in the proceedings – who is
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! the lessor – whether the second respondent had authority to
enter into the lease – tenants claim for refund of rent because of
the presence of friable asbestos on the property – whether there
was an agency agreement – whether the property was
uninhabitable
– outstanding rent – claim by tenants for
compensation for lost property – lessor to pay for asbestos
report – lessor’s claim for reimbursement of amount claimed for
contra work – lessor’s claim for cleaning and repairs
Legislation cited: Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) ss 180, 181
Residential Tenancies Act 1997 ss 12, 15, 29, 30, 83, 87
standard terms 33, 42, 46, 55, 67
Cases cited: Craig Jewell v J. Godfrey [1999] NSWRT 94
Maroney v Bullard [2016] ACAT 33
Mousouleas v Vacropoulous [2000] NSWRT 177
The Hurst-Meyers Charity Ltd v Khan & Ors [2020] ACAT
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
33
Wicks & Anor v The Hurst-Meyers Charity Ltd ABN 696 111
166 119 [2019] ACAT 92
Tribunal: Presidential Member H Robinson
Date of Orders: 7 December 2020
Date of Reasons for Decision: 7 December 2020
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
BETWEEN:
RT 626/2018
FREJA BLAIDD-NIXON
First Applicant/Tenant
KIMBERLEY WELLINGS
Second Applicant/Tenant
AND:
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! RALPH GEORGE NOEL NANCY HURST-MEYERS
First Respondent/Lessor
THE HURST-MEYERS CHARITY
Second Respondent/Lessor
RT 762/2018
RALPH GEORGE NOEL NANCY HURST-MEYERS
First Applicant/Lessor
THE HURST-MEYERS CHARITY
Second Applicant/Lessor
AND:
KIMBERLEY WELLINGS
First Respondent/Tenant Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
FREJA BLAIDD-NIXON
Second Respondent/Tenant
TRIBUNAL: Presidential Member H Robinson
DATE: 7 December 2020
ORDER
The Tribunal orders that:
1. The tenants’ claim against the first respondent is dismissed.
2. The second respondent is to pay to the tenants the sum of $3,073.30:
(a) $753.30, being the cost of the Lancaster and Dickenson asbestos
assessment; and
(b) $2320 compensation for loss of quiet enjoyment.
3. The tenants are to pay to the lessor $3,100:
(a) the outstanding rent of $2,900; and
(b) $200 for repair of holes in the walls and make good of the shelving;
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
to be offset against the amount at order 2.
4. The Office of Rental Bonds on behalf of the Territory is to release the sum of
$36.70 to the lessor and the remainder to the tenants.
………………………………..
Presidential Member H Robinson
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. The applicants1 Ms Wellings and Ms Blaidd-Nixon (the tenants), were the
,
tenants of a residential property (the Cottage) located on Caloola Farm, in
Tharwa in the Australian Capital Territory (Caloola). The second respondent2
,
the Hurst-Meyers Charity Ltd (the Charity/the lessor) holds that property as a
licensee from another entity. The first respondent3 Mr Hurst-Meyers, is a
,
director and secretary of the Charity. The tenancy broke down and both parties
are now seeking various remedies against each other including lost rent,
damages, and compensation.
The hearing process
2. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! The tenants were represented throughout the proceedings by Mr Faulder, a
solicitor with the ACT Tenants Union. Both tenants gave evidence and were
cross examined. They also called several friends and associates as witnesses.
3. The first respondent was represented during the earlier stages of the lengthy
hearing process by Ms Bolas, a solicitor. The first respondent then represented
himself from day eight until the completion of the hearing process. He gave
evidence and was cross examined. He also called numerous other witnesses,
whose evidence I will summarise as relevant below.
4. The second respondent is a corporation limited by guarantee registered under
the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) (Corporations Act). Notwithstanding its
name, it is not a registered charity. Its representation during the proceedings was Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
a matter of some contention. Briefly stated, Ms Bolas represented the Charity at
the commencement of the hearing, and then Mr Hurst-Meyers purported to
represent the Charity from day eight. However, despite several requests, Mr
Hurst-Meyers failed to file an Authority to Act on behalf of a Corporation, as
1 Ms Wellings and Ms Blaith-Nixon are the applicants in RT626/20 and respondents in
RT762/20
2 The Hurst-Meyers Charity is the second respondent in matter RT 626/2018 and the second
applicant in matter RT 762/2018. I have referred to the Charity as the second respondent or
‘the lessor’ throughout this decision for ease of reference.
3 Mr Hurst-Meyers is the first respondent in matter RT 626/2018 and the first applicant in matter
RT 762/2018. It is unclear in what capacity he is an applicant in RT 762/2018, but I have
assumed it is a precaution in the event he is found to be a lessor in RT 626/2018. I have
referred to him as the first respondent throughout the decision for ease of reference.
was required by the Tribunal’s procedures. 4 AustLII AustLI Instead, he relied upon
reconstruction of minutes from a meeting held several years ago, by which he
was purportedly granted authority to deal with legal matters, as the basis for his
authority. This situation is the subject of some commentary below. I determined
to proceed with the hearing despite the uncertainty as to the Charity’s
representation. At various times during the proceedings, another director, Mrs
Liza Hurst-Meyers, gave evidence. A company extract dated 17 May 2019 lists
the other director, at that time, as Mr and Mrs Hurst-Meyers’ daughter. 5 I am
satisfied that the Charity’s directors were aware of the proceedings and
acquiesced to such representation as was offered. 6 There was little point in
further adjourning the matter to put the basis of representation beyond doubt.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
5. The hearing process itself consumed some 10 sitting days, in addition to two
directions hearings. The transcripts fill two large A4 binders, the documents
eight of the same. Many of the filed documents were duplicates. Some have no
apparent source. In the first respondent’s case, submissions and evidence were
intertwined, despite him being legally represented some of the time. The first
respondent also made several attempts to file additional evidence or information
during the hearing, some of which was contrary to earlier submissions put on
his behalf. The length and complexity of the proceedings was frankly
disproportionate to the complexity of the case and the amount of money in
dispute. No effort was made by the first respondent to assist with the efficient
progress of the case, and it got to the point that, toward the end of the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
proceedings, I imposed a time limit on witnesses. I am satisfied this was
justified by the Tribunal’s obligation to ensure the procedures of the tribunal are
4 ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Procedural Directions 2010 (No 1) rule 7.1.2.
5 Although only one daughter is listed on the company search filed with the Tribunal, there is
correspondence from Mr Hurst-Meyers to ASIC of the same date seeking to amend the
registration information to reflect that his other daughter is also a director. Other documents
suggest an attempt was also made to correct the record to include several other independent
directors, but the status of this is not clear.
6 I note also that Mr Hurst-Meyers confirmed that he was aware of his statutory and fiduciary
duties under sections 180 and 181 of the Corporations Act 2001 to exercise his powers and
discharge his duties with care and diligence, in the best interest of the corporation, and for
proper purposes, and that he had considered any conflict of interest that arose, and that he was
satisfied that his role was not a conflict of interest in breach of those duties. While some
evidence in this matter caused me concern about this, it is ultimately a matter beyond the
purview of this Tribunal.
as simple, quick, inexpensive and informal as is consistent with achieving
justice. 7
6. Additionally, the hearing process was tainted by an unfortunate degree of
rancour between the parties, including allegations of impropriety made, albeit
certainly on instructions, by one practitioner against another without any
apparent basis. Those allegations were withdrawn by the solicitor, but later
pressed by Mr Hurst-Meyers. The allegations amount to nothing more than
speculation and I have not given them any weight in these reasons.
The agreement
7. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! The parties entered into a residential tenancy agreement on 24 June 2017
(RT Agreement). A bond of four weeks rent at $350 per week paid. The
agreement is stated to be between “Ralph George Noel Nancy Hurst-Meyers”,
of a stated residential address and the tenants. The signatures were witnessed by
another tenant, Mr Joshua Kunkler.
8. The RT Agreement is dated 16 June 2017. However, it appears common ground
that this date was not reflective of the date it was signed, but rather of the date
the tenants moved into another premises on Caloola farm. The tenants signed
the lease and moved into the Cottage on 24 June 2017.
9. The RT Agreement was in the standard form, incorporating the standard
residential tenancies terms in Schedule 1 of the Residential Tenancies Act 1997
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
(RT Act). More unusually, it provided for rent to be $450 week, of which “$100
per week can be contra.” It seems to be common ground that the “contra” was to
be work performed by the tenants for the Charity or Mr Hurst-Meyers.
The tenants’ case
10. The tenants sought orders against Mr Hurst-Meyers, who they alleged was the
lessor, or in the alternative against the Charity.
11. The tenants’ first argument was that neither Mr Hurst-Meyers nor the Charity
had authority to enter into the RT Agreement, by reason of having no authority
7 ACAT Act section 7(a)
to sublease the premises, and accordingly the tenants were not liable for rent
payable under it. They sought a repayment of all rent paid during the tenancy.
12. In the alternative, they argued that Cottage became uninhabitable by reason of
the presence of friable asbestos fibres. The fibres, they allege, were released
when the Caloola caretaker, Mr Kunkler, drilled into a wall to install shelves in
a bedroom in the Cottage. These fibres, the tenants say, fell to the floor, where
they drifted under the bed, remaining until they were identified by an asbestos
assessment in conducted in June 2018, around a year later, and then removed by
way of an environmental clean of the property. They sought orders that the rent
abated from the time the shelves were installed.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
13. The tenants sought:
(a) one of:
(i) a refund of all rent paid during the period of occupation ($16,250)
and contra performed ($2,600) on the basis that the lessor did not
have authority to sublet the cottage;
(ii) a refund of all rent paid from when the shelves were installed in
August 2017 ($14,150) and contra paid for that same period
($2,600) on the basis that the property was uninhabitable;
(b) $1,320 for asbestos decontamination of their personal property;
(c) $753.30, being the cost of the Lancaster and Dickenson asbestos Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
assessment;
(d) compensation of $5,000 for items destroyed due to asbestos
contamination; and
(e) the bond be released to them.
The first respondent
14. The tenants argued that Mr Hurst-Meyers was, at law, the lessor, being the other
party to the RT Agreement. Mr Hurst-Meyers’ position may be summarised as a
denial that he was the lessor, and hence a denial that he has any personal
liability under the RT Act. In his submissions, Mr Hurst-Meyers seeks
“compensation for being incorrectly sued”, 8 AustLII AustLI but this claim does not appear to
have been particularised or pressed, beyond an apparent claim for costs under
section 48 of the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008 (ACAT Act).
The second respondent
15. The Charity’s position, as articulated by Mr Hurst Meyers as its purported
representative, is that it is the lessor and it was duly authorised to enter into the
RT Agreement.
16. The Charity denies that the Cottage was at any relevant time during the tenancy
uninhabitable, or in the alternative, argues that that it became uninhabitable only
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! by reason of the tenants’ actions.
17. The Charity says that the tenants were specifically instructed that the Cottage
contained asbestos sheeting prior to commencing the lease. It says it never
authorised Mr Kunkler to act as its agent and would not have authorised any
work be done on the Cottage walls. Further, or in the alternative, it says that the
presence of the friable asbestos in the cottage was the result of the tenants, or an
associate of the tenants, placing it there to avoid liability to pay rent.
18. Briefly stated, the Charity argued that in early June 2018, the tenants fell behind
in their rent and sought to end the lease. At that time, they were advised that
they were in arrears of rent and had large outstanding electricity bills that they
would need to make good as well. After this, the tenants, or other allied tenants
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
of the property, planted friable asbestos in the Cottage, perhaps while attending
the property to remove their horses on 19 July 2019. This may have been done
as part of a co-ordinated effort with other tenants to have the property found to
be uninhabitable.
19. The Charity also made a counterclaim against the tenants for damage to the
Cottage. The quantum of this claim was something of a moving feast, changing
with each amended document. However, I take as the final claim the matters set
out in a document filed and exhibited as R16. This document contains a claim
8 Page 50
for $27,898.05, which exceeds the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. I take the excess to
be waived.
20. On this basis, I understand the second respondent to be seeking orders for:
(a) unpaid rent from 16 June 2018 to the date the property was ready for re-
rental on 5 October 2018, in the sum of $15,750;
(b) unperformed contra work of $2,600;
(c) electricity owed $2,720.90;
(d) asbestos report by prepared by Peter Hengst for $715;
(e) +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! several professional invoices:
(i) cleaning - $800;
(ii) plumbing - $502.15;
(iii) labour by Mr Pizania - $2,800;
(iv) bathroom repair - $1,188;
(v) painting house and laying carpet - $1,000;
(vi) repair of broken window - $543;
(vii) replacement carpets - $200;
(f) plumbing repair to a broken water pipe and water system - $1,500;
(g) asbestos removal - $2,079; and
(h) animal agistment - $1,300.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Credibility
21. The credibility of most of the witnesses was an issue in this matter, with some
witnesses at times giving contradictory or irreconcilable evidence and accusing
each other of not telling the truth. While I do not find that any party was
outright fabricating evidence, I had concerns about the evidence of both Mr
Hurst-Meyers and the tenants.
22. The evidence of both tenants was, from time to time, inconsistent with each
other, and with some of the documentation. Their witness statements were
nearly identical, including the same errors, and their use of language during
their oral testimony had a rehearsed quality to it, particularly their insistence, for
example, that they understood Mr Kunkler to be Mr Hurst-Meyers’s “agent”.
Ms Wellings was evasive in some of her answers, although when pressed under
cross examination she readily conceded that some of her evidence was wrong. I
am prepared to accept that most of the inconsistencies in the tenants’ evidence
was due to the effluxion of time, but not all. Where possible, I prefer
contemporaneous documentary evidence. I largely accept the evidence of the
other witnesses called by the tenants, although the passage of time may have
affected its reliability.
23. The evidence of Mr Hurst-Meyers was also of concern. It was at times
inconsistent, both with his earlier evidence and with that of other witnesses. It
was +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! also self-serving and prone to an evident degree of exaggeration and self-
aggrandisement that was unhelpful, particularly as much of this elaboration was
unrelated to the issues of the case. I found him a poor historian of past events. I
do not accept his un-corroborated testimony where it is contrary to that of
another party, or to the documentary evidence. Other than in relation to some
evidence given by Mrs Hurst-Meyers, discussed later, I otherwise accept the
evidence of Mr Hurst-Meyers’s other witnesses as being credible, although
again the passage of time has affected the recollections of some witnesses.
Findings of fact
24. My findings of fact, whether contested or otherwise, are as follows.
25. Around 1 June 2017 the tenants met Mr Hurst-Meyers at an open inspection of a Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
property in Queanbeyan. That property was not suitable, but Mr Hurst-Meyers
advised them that he had a more appropriate property, and took their contact
details.
26. On 2 June 2017, Mr Hurst-Meyers texted the Caloola address to one of the
tenants and advised them to “ask for Joshy and he’ll show you the 2 bedroom
cottage.” “Joshy” was Mr Kunkler, an existing resident who the tenants contend
was the acting caretaker at Caloola.
27. On or around 3 June 2017 the tenants attended Caloola and inspected the
outside of the Cottage. They could not inspect it inside, as another tenant,
Mr Margerison, was still residing there. The tenants evidence is that they would
accept the tenancy for $350 per week and consideration in the form of work to
be performed on the property (contra) in lieu of the additional $100 per week.
28. On 7 June 2017 the tenants attended Mr Hurst-Meyers’s home, seemingly to
sign the bond loan form. What happened on this occasion is discussed below.
29. The tenants moved to Caloola on 16 June 2017, but not into the Cottage. They
initially moved first into Mr Kunkler’s house, as the Cottage was still leased to
Mr Margerison. Mr Margerison moved out on the morning of 23 June 2017 and
the tenants moved into the Cottage that afternoon. This was the first time they
inspected the inside of the property. No ingoing or outgoing inspection was
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! conducted at this time. This is unfortunate, as the state of the property when it
was handed over to the tenants was the subject of contradictory evidence during
the proceedings.
30. Mr Hurst-Meyers’s oral evidence was that he had a meeting with Ms Wellings
at Caloola on 16 June 2017, 9 where Ms Wellings asked about the presence of
asbestos, and he advised her that the walls contained asbestos and instructed her
not to penetrate them. Again, there was no reference to a meeting of this date in
any of the material filed by Mr Hurst-Meyers prior to the hearing, or indeed
prior to the tenants giving their evidence. The only apparent reference is in the
filed chronology, which (incorrectly) asserts that the RT Agreement was
executed on this date. Mrs Hurst-Meyers’s oral evidence partially corroborates
that the meeting took place on 16 June 2017, but she did not mention the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
discussion about asbestos, and indeed she gave conflicting evidence about when
the tenants were told about the presence of the asbestos at all. 10 The tenants
deny the 16 June 2017 meeting took place at all. On balance, I am satisfied that
Mr Hurst-Meyers, at least, must have mistaken the alleged meeting on 16 June
2017 for the meeting that certainly occurred on 24 June 2017.
31. It is not in dispute that on 24 June 2017 Mr Hurst-Meyers did attend the
property and met with the tenants. Also present at this meeting were Mr
9 Transcript of proceedings 27 November 2018 page 280
10 Transcript of proceedings 27 November 2018 pages 133, 134
Kunkler and a resident of another house at Caloola, Ms Anastasia Utesheva.
The tenants signed the RT Agreement and backdated it to 16 June 2017.
32. For reasons set out below, I am satisfied that at this meeting, the tenants were
advised that Mr Kunkler was the caretaker for the property. The tenants
considered that this meant they should take any requests for maintenance to
him. Other discussions that took place on this day are discussed further below.
33. After moving into the Cottage, the tenants found they needed more storage.
They approached Mr Kunkler and asked if they could install shelving, in the
form of what appears to be old fencing. I am satisfied that Mr Kunkler assisted
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! the tenants with the installation of the shelves in the main bedroom, drilling
holes in the walls in order to install them. The consequences of this are
considered further below.
34. From 6 September 2017 to 16 October 2017 there were problems with the water
supply to Caloola. The tenants were provided with about 10 litres of water but
were required to buy more from Woolworths and to shower and wash
elsewhere. The tenants were offered one weeks rent reduction as compensation,
and they accepted that as compensation. They notified other maintenance issues
to Mr Kunkler, but he does not appear to have been overly responsive and issues
remained unaddressed.
35. In early October 2017 Mr Kunkler advised the tenants that an asbestos assessor
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
was attending Caloola to undertake assessments on other houses.11 The tenants
said that they anticipated an inspection of the Cottage as well, but no assessor
attended. Their evidence was that from this time they began to grow concerned
about the presence of asbestos in the Cottage, particularly in light of the holes
made in the walls. However, it does not appear that they took any steps or made
any complaints or otherwise brought their concerns to the lessor’s attention.
36. The tenants fell behind in rent over the course of 2018. Text messages before
the Tribunal suggest that Mr Hurst-Meyers was initially quite understanding
11 Transcript of proceedings 20 November 2018 page 209
about this, and Ms Wellings thanks him for “not harassing us for the money” AustLII AustLI 12
,
but the relationship thereafter deteriorated. The tenants ceased paying rent on
23 May 2018. On 30 May 2018 Mr Hurst-Meyers asked the tenants by SMS if
they are moving out. 13 On 2 June 2018 he sent a further text that stated that the
lease “expired” on 16 June 2018 and suggested the lease may not be
“renewed”.14 It is unclear what Mr Hurst-Meyers meant by this, as under the
Standard Terms, clauses 4 and 5, where a fixed term lease expires it becomes a
periodic lease, it does not cease unless terminated in accordance with the RT
Act.
37. It appears to be common ground that on or about 6 June 2018, there was a
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! telephone call between the tenants and Mr Hurst-Meyers during which they
intended to vacate the premises, perhaps by 13 June 2018, but if not sometime
shortly thereafter.
38. The events from this date on are the subject of some dispute. Briefly, the tenants
say that they became increasingly concerned about the safety of the premises,
while the lessor says, in effect, that the tenants manufactured that concern to
avoid liability for outstanding rent and electricity.
39. On or about 7 June 2018, the tenants arranged for an assessor named “Diego”
from Canberra Asbestos Removal to attend the property to take samples from
the hole in the spare bedroom, the loungeroom ceiling where a light had been
installed by an electrician, and an outside wall. They did not tell the lessor about Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
this. When asked why, Ms Blaidd-Nixon said that they acted on their own
initiative because the assessment was “urgent”. 15 The tenants did not have the
money for the sample to be analysed, but “Diego” advised he would hold the
samples, and that they should contact “Peter” to have them tested when they
could pay.
40. On 9 June 2018 Mr Hurst-Meyers sent a text to the tenants stating:
12 SMS Message, 27 April 2018, Exhibit R1, Tab 31 and A1 page 137
13 Exhibit R1, Tab 31, A1 page 138
14 Exhibit R1, Tab 32, A1 page 138
15 Transcript of proceedings 20 November 2018 at page 219
I’m happy to accept your notice but you can’t stop paying rent while your
living there. You have to pay last week’s rent and this week’s rent and
part of the back rent as a minimum.16
41. The tenants had not given the lessor written notice of a termination date, nor
nominated one orally, and therefore these was no agreement that the RT
Agreement would come to an end on a particular date. In relation to the rental
debt, it is unclear whether this text was intended to be a notice to remedy for the
purposes of clause 92(a) of the Standard Terms, but in any case it does not
comply with the requirements of one, as it does not contain a statement, as
required by subparagraph (ii) of that section, that if the tenant pays the rent
outstanding to the date of payment within 7 days of the date of service of the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! notice to remedy, no further action must be taken and the tenancy continues.
42. On or around 11 June 2018 Ms Blaidd-Nixon contacted Peter, who I understand
to be Mr Peter Hengst, of Asbestos Assessments ACT, and asked that he collect
the samples from Diego and test them. Ms Blaidd-Nixon’s evidence was to the
effect that Mr Hengst advised them he would charge a delivery fee for doing so,
or alternatively they could collect samples themselves. Mr Hengst was not
called by any party to give evidence.
43. On 12 June 2018, Ms Blaidd-Nixon decided to take the second option, and
obtain her own samples to take to the assessor for analysis. Again, she did not
tell the lessor. Instead, she donned gloves and a mask and took the samples from
the bedroom and one from a pre-existing hole outside the house. This seems like Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
an extraordinary foolish thing to do, but I accept her evidence that she did it.
The tenants then took samples to another asbestos company, Robson
Environmental Pty Ltd (Robson’s) for analysis.
44. Meanwhile, also on 12 June 2018, Mr Hurst-Meyers sent a text to the tenants
that stated:
…as per our conversation just then I am confirming that your lease
expires on the 16th of June 2018 and that this is the final day that you can
stay at Caloola.
16 A1, page 139
I’m concerned that you brought up asbestos contamination just today,
inside the actual property and so that for the next few days you can stay at
the conference room, not in that property.
I will call qualified people to have a look at what your concerns are, but
for the record, I never authorised [Mr Kunkler] or anyone to put any
shelving up in your property.
If you can vacate the property as soon as possible that would be sincerely
appreciated.
I will compile a ledger showing the amount of lease payments that are
due. If you can pay for last week’s and this week’s lease payments and all
lease payment’s not paid since 2017, that would be appreciated.
We wish to part on good terms and your cooperation would be
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! appreciated.17
45. The text message has the appearance of a termination notice. However, as noted
above, the Standard Terms do not permit the lessor to terminate a residential
tenancy agreement simply because the fixed term period has expired.
Accordingly, the lessor did not identify any lawful basis for issuing this
statement. Alternatively, if this was intended to be a notice of termination for
unpaid rent, it does not meet the requirements for a notice to vacate under
clauses 83 or 92 of the Standard Terms.
46. On 13 June 2018 Robson’s provided an analysis of the samples. The results
showed the presence of bonded (ie. non-friable) asbestos sheeting. The tenants
then physically vacated the Cottage but left their personal possessions within it.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
They advised Mr Hurst-Meyers of the outcome of the testing.
47. On 13 June 2018, Mr Hurst-Meyers wrote to Ms Wellings purporting to accept
her “notice to vacate”. It is not clear what notice he was referring to, but on
15 June 2018 Ms Wellings responded to Mr Hurst-Meyers advising that they
had neither received notice to vacate nor given it. 18 They confirmed that they
would no longer pay rent and would be seeking to recover rent paid on the basis
that the property was uninhabitable:
17 A1 page 139
18 A1 at 144
As you are aware the premises you have leased to us are contaminated
with asbestos contrary to the advice of your property manager when we
moved into the property at the beginning of our lease this time last year.
Our belongings remain in the property because they have been
contaminated by asbestos…
Please note that we intend to remove out belongings as soon as we know
it is safe to do so but advise that if you remove or damage our belongings
we will be seeking compensation through ACAT for any losses.
We also advise we do not intend to pay further rental payments. Further
we have received legal advice that we are entitled to recover rental
payments already made to you because the property is not fit for
residential occupation …
48. Once +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! advised of the presence of the asbestos sheeting, Mr Hurst-Meyers
promptly organised for another assessment by Mr Hengst, who he organised to
attend the property on 16 June 2018. Mr Hengst tested the walls and ceiling and,
according to his report, collected dust from the dining room TV, the bedroom
drawers and the lounge room storage box. The tenants were not advised of his
attendance until that morning, and were not present for the inspection as they
were viewing another property.
49. On 17 June 2018, Mr Hurst-Meyers texted the tenants setting out agistment
costs for any animals that remains on the property after that date. 19 These costs
amounted to $545 per week.
50. On 26 June 2018 the tenants attended the Cottage and found that their
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
belongings had been moved and some were missing. They reported this to the
police.
51. On 28 June 2018, the lessor obtained a full report from the Asbestos
Assessments ACT (the AA Report). This report confirmed the presence of
sheet asbestos in the walls, roof and cladding, but found that it presented a low
risk. Mr Hengst did not find asbestos in the dust that he tested. A copy of the
AA report was provided to the tenants.
19 A1 at 142
52. The tenants’ evidence is that the AA Report did not put their minds at ease.
Ms Blaidd-Nixon frankly stated that she did not believe it, 20 at least in part
because they did not believe Mr Hengst tested the correct areas of the Cottage.
53. The tenants determined to source their own report, and arranged for L&D
Consulting (L&D) to attend the Cottage and undertake testing on 19 July 2018.
It appears that L&D was also engaged by other tenants to assess their properties
at Caloola on that day.
54. Ms Blaidd-Nixon and Ms Wellings attended this inspection. L&D took samples
as directed by the tenants, including from under the bed in the main bedroom
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! and from a pile of dust on the kitchen bench. Ms Blaidd-Nixon explained that:
“I asked him to test samples under the bed because the bed is low lying and hard
to vacuum under.”21 Ms Wellings directed the assessor to test a small pile of
dust on the kitchen bench, amongst other places.
55. The L&D Report, provided to the tenants on 23 July 2019, identified the dust
sampled from the kitchen bench and under the bed as containing friable
asbestos.
56. At this point, the evidence gets particularly contentious. The lessor says that the
tenants planted the asbestos containing material (ACM) dust in the Cottage. The
lessor suggests this happened on 19 July 2018, when Ms Blaidd-Nixon and her
friend, Ms Tabitha Wilde, attended the property to collect her horses. The lessor
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
alleges that while on the property, Ms Blaidd-Nixon entered the Cottage and
placed a small pile of dust on the kitchen bench and under the bed. I have
considered this in more detail below. In summary, I am satisfied that somebody
entered the Cottage and placed the ACM on the kitchen bench sometime
between inspection by Asbestos Assessments ACT and the inspection by L&D.
I am not convinced it was Ms Blaidd-Nixon.
57. Following the results of the L&D report, the Cottage was sealed. The Glade
Group later attended and undertook an environmental clean. Some of the
tenants’ property was cleaned but some was bagged and disposed of.
20 Transcript of proceedings 20 November 2018 at page 224
21 Transcript of proceedings 20 November 2018 at 221
58. The tenants removed the remainder of their property from the premises on
10 August 2018. A succession of other tradespeople, considered below, then
attended to clean or restore the premises.
Consideration of the issues
Who is the lessor?
59. The first question in this case is: is the lessor Mr Hurst-Meyers or the Charity?
60. The tenants argued that the lessor was Mr Hurst-Meyers. Mr Hurst-Meyers
argued that the lessor was the Charity. The Charity, to the extent that it was
represented at all, agreed that it was the lessor.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
61. As I understand the tenants’ position, it is that they negotiated with Mr Hurst-
Meyers, understood that they entered into a residential tenancy agreement with
him, and always considered that he was the lessor. This is an entirely reasonable
assumption. It is apparent that Mr Hurst-Meyers signed the lease in his own
name. He did not annotate that he signed it on behalf of the Charity. Most of the
invoices submitted in evidence were in Mr Hurst-Meyers’ name. The tenants
dealings were with him.
62. On 7 June 2017 the tenants appear to have attended Mr Hurst-Meyers house to
sign a bond loan form. During the course of the hearing, Mr Hurst-Meyers gave
detailed oral evidence as to how he laid out all the documentation relating to the
corporate structure of the Charity, including its Constitution, its management
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
company, his role, that of the Board, and various other details. This oral
evidence was lead after the tenants had given their evidence, during which they
were not questioned about it. No mention was made of these events in Mr
Hurst-Meyers’s previous, extensive, written documentation.
63. The only partial corroboration of this incident is from Mrs Hurst-Meyers, who
subsequently gave evidence that she was also present for this meeting. The
evidence of Mr and Mrs Hurst-Meyers was largely consistent. The tenants
declined an offer to be recalled to address questions about the incident.
64. Nonetheless, the evidence of Mr and Mrs Hurst-Meyers has a degree of
incredulity about it. All parties agree that the only document signed on this
occasion was the bond form. The RT Agreement was not. No explanation was
offered for why not. Mr Hurst-Meyers says that he showed the tenants a copy of
the company search for the Charity, and another company that acted as the
management company, in order to advise them of the corporate structure.
However, despite stating that he had all the documents in folders, Mr Hurst-
Meyers was unable to produce a company search from 2017 to the Tribunal.
Additionally, documentation before the Tribunal suggests that Mr Hurst-Meyers
only became aware of a discrepancy in ASIC’s records as to the identity of
appointed directors on about 17 May 2019 22 when that he wrote to ASIC to
correct the corporate register and ensure his daughter was appropriately
recorded as a director. 17 May 2019 is the date of a company extract provided
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
to the Tribunal. 23 It would be very surprising if Mr Hurst-Meyers has not
noticed this discrepancy on any company extract he showed the tenants in 2017.
At best, if he showed this document to the tenants, he had not reviewed it
himself first.
65. Moreover, having heard the evidence of Mr Hurst-Meyers, I am satisfied that
Mr Hurst-Meyers did not have a sophisticated understanding of the legal
distinction between himself, the second respondent or other associated legal
entities. I am satisfied that he would not have been, in 2017, in a position to
explain the distinction to the tenants. I do not accept the evidence of Mr Hurst-
Meyers, or that of Mrs Liza Hurst-Meyers, that Mr Hurst-Meyers explained his
corporate structure to the tenants in any degree of detail when he met them on Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
7 June 2017. He is far from the only lessor to neglect to do this. I am prepared
to accept, however, that he may have discussed arrangements in broad terms,
and that he and Mrs Hurst-Meyers now have an established explanation process
and may have been confused as to when they introduced it.
66. Of greater concern to me is Mr Hurst-Meyers’ reliance on the documents
exhibited in these proceedings at Exhibit R16. The document is headed:
Minutes of meeting Accepting new roles for the Hurst-Meyers Charity LTD
Board.
22 Exhibit R17
23 Exhibit R21
ACCEPTANCE OF NEW ROLES FOR the Hurst-Meyers Charity LTD.
MINUTES OF MEETING OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS…
Held at: Tilley’s Café at Brigalow St & Wattle St, Lyneham, ACT 2602
At: 6:00pm On: 19 September 2016. (authorising minutes) 24
67. The document proceeds to list who was in attendance, that a quorum was
present, and to assign various roles to various board members. Amongst other
things, it provided:
5. Ralph Hurst-Meyers was authorised to act as a primary contact for all
Government business and create leases on behalf of the Hurst-Meyers
Charity Limited.
68. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! The document was signed by Mr Hurst-Meyers, and “Justin James” was cited as
the minute taker. It is undated.
69. In his oral evidence, Mr Hurst-Meyers explained that this document was signed
on 21 May 2019. That is, it was created and signed nearly three years after the
meeting, after the commencement of these proceedings, and after he had
received legal advice about the issues.
70. Mr Hurst-Meyers produced an email purporting to be from Mr Justin James, the
minute taker. In that email, Mr James asserted that the reconstructed document
was an accurate reflection of what happened at the meeting, three years
previously. Mr James was not available for cross examination.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
71. This ‘reconstructed’ minutes are completely inappropriate document to put
before a tribunal. It is of no weight. I do not regard it as confirming anything
about the corporate arrangements in effect on 19 September 2016 or at any time
since. Mr Hurst-Meyers’s reliance upon it only adds to my concerns about his
record-keeping and management practices.
72. Nonetheless, while I am unconvinced by Mr Hurst-Meyers’s evidence as to
either his authorisation to enter into leases or his explanation to the tenants as to
the capacity in which he did so, I do not consider either matter to be
determinative of the issue.
24 Exhibit R16
73. I am satisfied that Mr Hurst-Meyers was acting as the Charity’s agent at all
relevant times.
74. An agency arrangement can arise in two circumstances.
(a) Where a person (the first person) has represented to another person (the
second person) that a third person (the agent) has authority to enter into
contracts on their behalf; or
(b) The first person ratifies a contract made by the agent, even if the agent did
not have the authority to enter into the contract.
75. At no time did Mr Hurst-Meyers have the legal capacity to enter into a lease in
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! relation to Caloola in his individual capacity. Whether or not he was properly
authorised to enter into the lease on behalf of the Charity, the Charity clearly
ratified it and has assumed responsibility for it as lessor. Where an agent has no
authority, the lessor will be bound by the agent’s representation if the lessor
subsequently ratified those representations. The Charity has done that. The
Charity has accepted responsibility for his actions.
76. For completeness, I note that Mr Hurst-Meyers may have been an undisclosed
agent of the Charity. An undisclosed agent may incur personal liability, as well
as liability on behalf of their principal. However, the applicants did not suggest
this, or pursue that line of argument when the question was raised by the
Tribunal, and therefore I do not make any findings to this regard.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
77. I am satisfied that the Charity is the lessor.
The second preliminary issue: did the Charity have authority to enter into the
RT Agreement?
78. The second issue in this case is whether the Chairty even has the authority to
enter into the residential tenancy agreement.
79. It appears that Caloola was originally owned by another company that went into
administration. The administrator, Deloitte, took possession of the property and
entered into a sale agreement with the Charity. A licence agreement was
executed between Deloitte and the Charity on 20 September 2016.
80. The licence agreement provides that the premises may used for the “operations
of the licensee” (clause 3.1), with ‘Operations’ defined in clause 1.1 to mean
“ business operations of the Licensee being that of a charity for
disadvantaged persons.” There is no general authority to enter into residential
tenancies, although the respondents appeared to argue that providing
accommodation to disadvantaged persons would fall within clause 1.1. No
person associated with Deloitte was called as a witness. There is no evidence
before me, nor any submissions, that suggest that the lease to the tenants was
part of a ‘charity for disadvantaged persons’.
81. Nonetheless, the licensor has taken no issue with the proceedings, and has
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! agreed in writing that:
The licence agreement entitled the Licensee to full use of the Licensed
Area of the Property. The Licensed Area includes the entire property and
all building contained therein. As such, I confirm that Hurst-Meyers
Charity Ltd had the right, pursuant to the licence agreement, to enter into
rental agreements.25
82. In relation to this passage, and the agreement, Senior Member Mulligan
observed in The Hurst-Meyers Charity Ltd v Khan & Ors [2020] ACAT 33
(Khan) that:
Mr Faulder argues that the act of the Charity entering into a residential
tenancy agreement with the tenant’s breaches sub clause 11.1.
With respect, I do not agree with Mr Faulder’s analysis for the following
reasons: Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
(a) Clause 3.1 of the licence agreement deals with the way in which the
licensee can use the property. It provides “the Licensed Area and
equipment may only be used for the operations of the licensee and
related activities;”
(b) The property contained a number of dwellings, including the White
House. In my opinion it would be one of the reasonable operations
of the licensee to lease out those dwellings;
(c) My finding in this regard is supported by the view taken by the
licensor who expressly addressed the issue as to whether it was a
permissible use of the property for the licensee to lease the
dwellings to tenants. He said:[19]
25 Tenant’s submissions in reply, annexure M, email from David Mansfield (Deloitte) to
Mr Faulder, dated 16 July 2018
“The license agreement entitled the Licensee full use of the
Licensed Area of the Property. The Licensed Area include the
entire property and all buildings contained therein. As such
confirmed that Hurst- Meyers Charities Ltd have the right,
pursuant to the license agreement, to enter into rental
agreements.”
(d) The Charity’s act of entering into a residential tenancy agreement,
with the tenants, in relation to the White House was a permissible
act under the licence agreement and did not “assign, transfer or
otherwise dispose of the Licence or any right under the deed;”
(e) The licence for the property remained wholly in the hands of the
Charity. They operated in accordance with the licence agreement
and leased a portion of the licensed property, the White House, to
the tenants.26
83. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! I adopt these observations. The lease was entered into by the Charity and the
Charity is the lessor and it was duly authorised to enter into a lease in respect of
the Cottage with the tenants.
84. That being decided, I now turn to the tenants’ and the lessors’ substantive cases.
Tenants’ first claim: refund of rent paid
85. The first basis for the tenants’ claim for a refund of rent is that neither of the
respondents had the requisite authority to enter into the lease. For the reasons
set out above, that claim is dismissed.
86. The second basis upon which the tenants are seeking to have the rent remitted is
that the property was uninhabitable from the period August 2017 to the end of
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
the tenancy due to the presence of friable asbestos.
87. The basis for this claim may be summarised as follows:
(a) The tenants were unaware that the Cottage was constructed from ACM.
(b) The tenants wished to install additional shelving in the main bedroom and
the second bedroom in the property.
(c) The tenants understood from representations made by Mr Hurst-Meyers
that Mr Kunkler was the caretaker and an agent of the Charity. They
26 The Hurst-Meyers Charity Ltd v Khan & Ors [2020] ACAT 33 at [63]-[64]
sought his permission, on behalf of the lessor, to install the shelving, and
he gave it.
(d) Mr Kunkler installed the shelving, and while doing so he drilled into the
wall of the cottage, causing the bonded asbestos sheeting to become
friable asbestos, some of which fell to the floor of the bedroom, where it
remained until it was identified by testing undertaken by an asbestos
assessor.
88. Both parties provided little in the way of expert evidence about the effect of
asbestos, or the magnitude of the risk of exposure. However, the following basic
facts do not appear to be in dispute. The historical use of asbestos is a
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
recognised problem in the ACT, and Australia, and many older properties in the
Territory contain asbestos. ACM are materials that contain bonded (non-friable)
asbestos. An example of such material is the asbestos sheeting used to construct
some of the walls of the Cottage. The mere presence of ACM material does not
render a residence uninhabitable, provided the material is well maintained and
handled appropriately, but ACM can be dangerous if it is damaged or degraded
in such a way that fibres come loose and the asbestos becomes friable.
89. ACM is different to loose-fill asbestos (such as “Mr Fluffy”), which is subject
to a different regulatory scheme. It is possible the distinction was also the cause
of some confusion in this matter.
90. Section 12(3)(e) of the RT Act provides that where a property has an asbestos Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
assessment report, this must be provided to any tenant. However, there is no
requirement that the owners of a residential property obtain an asbestos report.
Where there is no asbestos assessment report for a property, section 12(3)(f) of
the RT Act provides that the lessor must instead provide a copy of the generic
asbestos advice (asbestos advice) with any RT Agreement. I am satisfied that
the tenants were not provided with either an asbestos report or an asbestos
advice. That amounts to a breach of the lessor’s obligations under the RT Act.
91. Mr Hurst-Meyers’s evidence is that rather than providing the asbestos advice,
he instead advised the parties orally about the presence of asbestos on the
property during a meeting at Caloola on 16 June 2017, when he claims he told
Ms Wellings: “it’s got fibro. It’s got asbestos inside and out, so you can’t
penetrate the walls.”27 The tenants deny this. They deny ever speaking to Mr
Hurst-Meyers about the presence of asbestos on the property.
92. I make several observations about this.
93. First, for reasons set out at paragraph 30, I am not satisfied that the conversation
of 16 June 2017 happened at all. If there was a discussion, it was more likely on
another occasion.
94. Second, I am not convinced that Mr Hurst-Meyers knew about the presence of
bonded asbestos in the property in June 2017.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
95. Mr Hurst-Meyers’s evidence as to how he came to know about the presence of
bonded asbestos at the Cottage is problematic. He said that one of his
contractors, Mr Shepherd, told him about the presence of the asbestos prior to
the tenants moving in in June 2017. However, Mr Shepherd’s evidence during
the hearing appears to have been that he advised Mr Hurst-Meyers of the
presence of asbestos around the time the tenants vacated, 28 or perhaps around
when they moved in in June 2017. 29 On balance, I think it most likely that any
discussion between Mr Hurst-Meyers and Mr Shepherd took place after the
tenants vacated and Mr Shepherd had inspected the Cottage. 30 I note that while
Mrs Hurst-Meyers first suggested that Mr Shepherd gave them a report in
2016, 31 she later conceded she did not know when he was at the property.32
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
96. Mr Hurst-Meyers’s asserted knowledge of the existence of bonded asbestos on
the property in or before 2017 would also be problematic for the Charity. If
Mrs Hurst-Meyers were correct, and Mr Shepherd had provided a report in
2016, that would mean that the lessor was in possession of an asbestos report
that they failed to provide to the tenants at the commencement of the tenancy. It
would also mean that Mr Hurst-Meyers, even if not in possession of a report,
27 Transcript of proceedings 27 November 2018 page 280
28 Transcript of proceedings 14 August 2019 page 145, lines 45-47
29 Transcript of proceedings 14 August 2019 page 145, line 44
30 See, transcript of proceedings 14 August 2019 page 145, lines 26-27
31 Transcript of proceedings 14 August 2019 pages 111–114, lines 21-28
32 Transcript of proceedings 14 August 2019 page 135
had been advised of the risk and taken no action to investigate it. Facebook
pages tendered in evidence suggest that in 2017 Mr Hurst-Meyers asked Mr
Kunkler to work on materials that were very likely ACM. 33 This would be an
unlikely or irresponsible instruction if Mr Hurst-Meyers was aware of the risk at
the time of making that request. The more likely explanation is that he was
confused about the dates and did not know about the presence of ACM until late
in 2017.
97. Third, Mr Margerison’s evidence was that in 2017 he had raised the issue of
asbestos with Mr Hurst-Meyers, and Mr Hurst-Meyers said he would look at his
records and get back to him.34 His evidence was that “[t]here was never any
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! confirmation that there was but I also believe that there wasn't any confirmation
that there wasn't.”35 It would be remarkably irresponsible for Mr Hurst-Meyers
to know about asbestos on the property at this time and yet not advise
Mr Margerison when asked.
98. Fourth, at no stage in the correspondence between the parties in June 2017,
when the allegations of asbestos contamination first surface, does Mr Hurst-
Meyers claim to have told the tenants about the asbestos or indicate that he was
aware of the presence of a report. He did not respond to Ms Wellings’ claim, in
an email, that she had earlier in the tenancy been advised by Mr Kunkler that
the property did not contain asbestos.36 Nor did Mr Hurst-Meyers assert, in the
text message quoted at paragraph 44 above (in which he denied giving any
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
authority to Mr Kunkler) that he had advised the tenants of the presence of
asbestos in 2017.
99. Mrs Hurst-Meyers gave evidence that representatives of the Charity now warn
tenants about the presence of asbestos, much as they do about its corporate
structure. No doubt this is now the practice. However, I am not satisfied that this
was the practice at the time the parties entered into the RT Agreement, and I am
not satisfied that Mr Hurst-Meyers gave any such warning, or even that he knew
33 Exhibit A1, page 216 and 237
34 Transcript of proceedings 14 August 2019 page 82, line 38
35 Transcript of proceedings 14 August 2019 page 83 lines 3-4
36 Exhibit A1 page 14
about the presence of bonded asbestos. Indeed, I am satisfied he gave no
warning.
100. For their part, the tenants say that Ms Wellings, who had undertaken an asbestos
awareness course, asked Mr Kunkler about asbestos and he replied that the
property was “completely clear and it had an asbestos check.”37 There is no
verification of this assertion, but I have no evidence contrary to it either. It has
no bearing on the ultimate outcome of this matter.
The role of Mr Kunkler
101. The RT Agreement, clause 67(1), required that the tenants obtain the lessor’s
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! permission before undertaking any modifications to the premises. It is not in
dispute that the tenants never sought the direct consent of Mr Hurst-Meyers or
the Charity to undertake modifications to the Cottage. Instead, they asked
Mr Kunkler.
102. The tenants say that Mr Hurst-Meyers appointed Mr Kunkler as the caretaker
and ‘agent’ and that they approached him for all matters relating to works or
repairs on the premises, including for permission to conduct those works. The
respondents and particularly Mr Hurst-Meyers deny that Mr Kunkler was acting
as an agent or representative. They say he had no authority on the property and
was in the process of negotiating an arrangement whereby he would undertake
maintenance tasks for payment.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Was Mr Kunkler the lessor’s agent?
103. As set out above, an agency arrangement can arise in two circumstances,
including where a person represents to another person (the second person) that a
third person has authority to enter into contracts on their behalf.
104. I am satisfied that Mr Hurst-Meyers appointed Mr Kunkler as his agent for the
purposes of dealing with the tenants on Caloola in relation to maintenance
issues.
105. First, the Tribunal has before it a body of correspondence between Mr Kunkler
and Mr Hurst-Meyers. In that correspondence, Mr Kunkler suggests that if
37 Transcript of proceedings 13 November 2018 page 131
Mr Hurst-Meyers wants him to continue working at Caloola, he will need to be
paid an acceptable wage. The language presupposes that the relationship is
already established and needs to be regularised and paid appropriately. There is
discussion over remuneration. The precise terms of the arrangement are of no
matter. Whatever the remuneration, it is apparent that at the time of the
discussion, Mr Kunkler was performing general maintenance tasks at Caloola
and expected some consideration for doing so.
106. Second, I am satisfied that Mr Hurst-Meyers represented to the tenants that
Mr Kunkler was the lessor’s agent, and that in practice the tenants treated him
as such. This was confirmed by the evidence of Ms Ustesheva when she
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! explained what she saw on the 24 June 2017 as follows:
…the girls were already living out at the caretaker’s house which is the
manager’s office. They were there for about a week, I think, before that,
and when the tenants’ from the white house moved out and we moved in
and then [Mr Hurst-Meyers] came around before that and we were at the
house in the living room area, and basically the girls signed a lease and
they got copies and [Mr Hurst-Myers] appointed Josh as manager, so
explained the girls that if there was anything to be fixed to go through
Josh and then he left and the girls started cleaning up…38
107. Similarly, Mr Margerison said that he understood that Mr Kunkler had a
“caretaker sort of role”39 and Ms Kennedy described him as “basically the right
hand man and the one who was able to get everything done and orchestrate
matters at Caloola”.40
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
108. Thirdly, there is evidence that Mr Kunkler did undertake various works on the
property. Ms Ustesheva said that Mr Hurst-Meyers asked Mr Kunkler to fix a
broken bathroom in her house,41 and she confirmed that he did most of the
repairs at the property at that time.42 Mr Kunkler also confirmed in writing that
he installed the shelves. 43
38 Transcript of proceedings 13 November 2018 page 111, lines 31-38
39 Transcript of proceedings 14 August 2019 page 95, line 2
40 Transcript of proceedings 14 August 2019 page 41, lines 41-47
41 Transcript of proceedings page 14 August 2019 page 112, line 5
42 Transcript of proceedings 14 August 2019 page 112, lines 21-22
43 Exhibit R3, Tab 16
109. Mr Hurst-Meyers argues that Mr Kunkler was working outside of his authority,
and indeed was actively undermining the Charity at times. However, I am
satisfied that the tenants were not aware of this and reasonably believed
Mr Kunkler was the agent of the lessor and was authorised to approve requests
for maintenance and alterations.
110. I am satisfied that Mr Kunkler approved the tenants request for additional
shelving. This took the form of regular shelving in some rooms, and installation
of a lattice “fence” in the main bedroom. Ms Ustesheva’s evidence was that she
witnessed Mr Kunkler install some shelving, 44 although where and what isn’t
clear. Ms Kennedy heard him installing shelves, 45 although she also gave
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! evidence that another person ultimately helped Ms Wellings to install shelves
because Mr Kunkler never followed through on agreement to assist with it. 46
Photographic evidence suggests the only shelving in the property was in the
main and second bedrooms and next to the kitchen. Ms Wellings and Mr
Blundell installed the kitchen shelving, so, the only shelving Mr Kunkler could
have installed was that in the main or second bedrooms. I am satisfied he did
this in 2017. Ultimately, though, I am not sure it matters whether Mr Kunkler
installed the lattice, or someone else did. At some stage, someone installed it,
and they drilled through an asbestos wall to do so.
The consequences for the tenants
111. There is no evidence as to the way Mr Kunkler installed the shelving. The
tenants submit that, res ipsa loquitur, 47 I should assume that because the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
installation must have involved drilling, some ACM dust must have fallen to the
floor during this process, and that it remained there during the duration of their
tenancy, until it was identified by an asbestos assessment undertaken by L&D.
112. The is no evidence before me as to whether the dust was of a kind that could
have come from drilling into the bedroom wall.
113. Could the ACM dust have remained beneath the bed for a year?
44 Transcript of proceedings 13 November 2018 page 112, lines 18-22
45 Transcript of proceedings 14 August 2019 page 9 at lines 19-21 (or knew that he did -
Transcript of proceedings 14 August 2019 page 50 at lines 19-20)
46 Transcript of proceedings 14 August 2019 page 15 at 7, 19-21 and page 27 at lines 15-20
47 Latin, for ‘the thing speaks for itself’
114. The tenants’ evidence was inconsistent as to whether they vacuumed under the
bed during this time, with Ms Wellings saying she did not48 but later clarifying
that she vacuumed the room but not under the bed because it was low lying and
she couldn’t get under it.49 I accept that it is possible that the tenants did not
vacuum under the bed for the duration of the tenancy.
115. More problematic is that Mr Hengst did not see the dust when he undertook his
inspection of the Cottage. He was not called to give evidence, so it is impossible
to know with any certainty if he looked. In his report Mr Hengst says only that
he tested the television in the dining room, the storage box in the bedroom, the
drawers in the main bedroom and a storage box in the loungeroom. He does not
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! mention the bed. Mr Hurst-Meyers gave evidence that when he discussed the
L&D report with Mr Hengst, Mr Hengst said “no way did I actually miss the
kitchen bench and no way did I miss the actual bed” and “I dust tested that
thoroughly.”50 However, I do not accept Mr Hurst-Meyers’s evidence in this
regard. It is contrary to Hengst’s report and it is unlikely that Mr Hengst would
have tested underneath the bed and failed to mention that in his report.
116. On balance, I accept it is possible that dust from the installation of the shelves
fell to the floor and remained under the bed for a considerable period of time.
117. The difficulty, however, is that the dust may have come from one of several
other sources in the meantime, including:
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
(a) Diego’s collection of samples;
(b) Ms Blaidd-Nixon’s own interference with the walls to collect samples;
(c) the same source as the dust found on the kitchen bench;
118. The pile of dust found on the kitchen bench is particularly concerning.
119. The lessor asserts that kitchen dust pile was planted by the tenants, who planted
the dust under the bed at the same time. In support of this argument, Mr Hurst-
Meyers pointed out that when the L&D inspectors came to the property, the
48 Transcript of proceedings 13 November 2018 page 90;
49 Transcript of proceedings 13 November 2018 pages 94-95
50 Transcript of proceedings 15 July 2019 page 238
tenants directed them to where to take samples, suggesting they knew they were
there. In reply, Ms Blaidd-Nixon said that she asked L&D to sample an area
under the bed because that had been least disturbed in the 12 months they had
been there.51 No reasonable explanation was offered for the dust on the kitchen
bench, but on the basis of the evidence I am satisfied it would have been
obvious to anyone in the room, including the tenants.
120. The tenants, as best I can discern, claim that the asbestos dust was placed on the
table by an electrician who attended the property to undertake work on some
lights, including one in the kitchen, during June 2018. In their evidence, they
made a variety of accusations against the electrician, some of which border on
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! scurrilous. The electrician denied all these allegations. There is little evidence to
support them, beyond personal observation, and they are largely irrelevant.
Significantly, the light fitting that the electrician worked on was not located
over the bench, so the dust could not have fallen accidentally. I consider it
inherently unlikely that a qualified and experienced electrician would collect
asbestos dust in the manner that the tenants suggest and leave it lying, on a pile,
on the kitchen bench of a client.
121. So how else could the asbestos dust have gotten on the bench?
122. Timing wise, I am confident that the Mr Hengst would have identified the dust
if it has been on the bench when he inspected the property on 29 June 2018.
Accordingly, I am satisfied that the asbestos dust was not present on the kitchen Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
bench when Mr Hengst inspected the property on 29 June 2018. I am satisfied it
was placed in the Cottage, deliberately, sometime thereafter. This was, notably,
well after the tenants had ceased to reside at Caloola.
123. I note, for completeness, that the lessor attempted, during the hearing on
27 November 2018, to put into evidence a photograph, extracted from what
appears to have been a video or camera recording. The lessor alleged that the
video was taken by Mrs Hurst-Meyers on 17 July 2018, and that it showed the
dust was not present on the bench on that date. Neither the photograph nor the
video were filed prior to the hearing. Despite repeated requests from the tenants’
51 Transcript of proceedings 13 November 2018 page 90, lines 14-16
solicitor, and a direction from the Tribunal, the original image or recording,
with the metadata, was not filed. I can only infer that the metadata would not
have assisted the lessor. I give the video no weight.
124. The lessor suggests that Ms Blaidd-Nixon planted the asbestos when she
attended on 19 July 2018 to collect her horses. She was, on this occasion,
accompanied by Ms Wilde. Ms Blaidd-Nixon denies this. Her denials are
supported by Ms Wilde, who filed a witness statement and was cross examined.
Ms Blaidd-Nixon and Ms Wilder have consistent evidence that they took about
20 minutes, all up, to load the horses, including collecting them and having a
cigarette.52 They denied entering the house. Video evidence provided by the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! lessor suggests that there is some discrepancy as to time and the order of events
as relayed by Ms Blaidd-Nixon and Ms Wilde, but does not otherwise contradict
it. While Ms Blaidd-Nixon arguably had a brief opportunity of time to plant the
asbestos dust on 19 July 2018, I accept the evidence of Ms Wilde that she did
not.
125. The lessor’s alternative suggestion is that the tenants, along with other tenants
on the property, were part of a conspiracy to construct evidence of asbestos
contamination. Again, the lessor has provided little in the way of direct
evidence but has asked the Tribunal to make a finding based on inferences to be
drawn from the totality of the circumstances.
126. There is some support for the ‘conspiracy’ proposition from another witness, Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Ms Kennedy, who the lessor called to give evidence. Ms Kennedy lived at
Caloola from October 2017 to January 2018. She was perhaps the most
objective party, having not been involved in any of the events of this matter, and
having left sometime before the relationships on Caloola truly broke down. She
said:
…I think [Mr Kunkler] planted it but – and if anything the girls may or
may not have been aware. If anything, I think they were probably told
after the fact, but I don’t know if they had anything to do with it.53
127. Unfortunately, the basis upon which she drew this conclusion was not clear.
52 Transcript of proceedings 13 November 2020 page 114
53 Transcript of proceedings 14 August 2019 page 19
128. I understand, from Mr Hurst-Meyers’ evidence, that similar events happened in
other tenancies. However, those matters were not heard before me. I accept
from Mr Hurst-Meyers that several tenants at Caloola were in dispute with him,
several tenants were aware of the presence of asbestos by mid-2018, and some
of those tenants were angry about it and talking to each other. However, there is
no probative evidence before this Tribunal of any individual or individuals
having planted asbestos dust in the Cottage or elsewhere.
129. Ultimately, there is insufficient evidence before me to conclude who placed the
pile of asbestos dust on the kitchen table. Someone did, as its placement was
clearly not accidental.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
130. I do not believe that it would be any person associated with the Charity. Placing
the asbestos on the bench did not in any way benefit the Charity. I do not accept
it was the electrician.
131. It may have been one of the tenants. The tenants had an ostensible motive to
place the dust on the bench, being to terminate the RT Agreement and recover
rent on the basis the property was uninhabitable, as clearly foreshadowed in
their letter to the lessor of 14 June 2018. As well as motive, Ms Blaidd-Nixon
also may have had access to asbestos dust, having conceded removing asbestos
from a wall of the Cottage on a previous occasion. However timing is an issue. I
am not satisfied that Ms Blaidd-Nixon planted the asbestos on 19 July 2018, and
it would be pure speculation to suggest she or Ms Wellings did so on another Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
occasion.
132. Both Mr Hurst-Meyers and his witness, Ms Kennedy, suggest others may have
been involved. On Mr Hurst-Meyers evidence, there were other residents who
were in dispute with him. Asbestos was, by mid-June 2018, known to be present
in some if not most of the houses on Caloola. It appears to have been known
amongst the tenants that L&D was coming to undertake an inspection on 19
July 2018. It would have been known that the Cottage was empty on this date. It
is possible that another tenant planted the dust in the at that time uninhabited,
Cottage, in preparation for that inspection.
133. As to its source, the ACM dust in the kitchen appears to be the same
composition as that tested in the bedroom. I can conclude no more than that.
134. However, the clear evidence that ACM was planted on the kitchen bench,
possibly raises the question in my mind as to whether the dust may have been
planted under the bed in the bedroom too. Indeed, in all the circumstances, that
the asbestos dust was also placed under the bed, at the same time, is perhaps the
most likely of several competing possibilities. This means I cannot be satisfied
that it had been there since Mr Kunkler installed the shelves.
135. Whoever placed the ACM dust was an extraordinarily foolish person. That
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! person found ACM, possibly reduced it to dust in such a way that they
contained friable asbestos, and then deliberately placed the asbestos dust on the
bench. One can only hope they exercised due care.
Was the property uninhabitable?
136. The tenants vacated the property on 13 June 2018 but their property remained in
it and they had asserted a right to control entry and inspection that was not
consistent with having abandoned the property. Therefore they remained tenants
during this time, and remained liable for rent.
137. The tenants seek a full rebate of rent from the date the property became
uninhabitable, pursuant to standard term 87(3) in Schedule 1 of the RT Act.
Standard Terms 86 and 87, relevantly provide that:
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
86 The lessor or the tenant may, by written notice, terminate the tenancy on a
date specified in the notice on the following grounds:
(a) the premises are not fit for habitation;
(b) …
87 (1)In either case the lessor must give not less than 1 week’s notice of
termination of the tenancy, and the rent abates from the date that the
premises are uninhabitable.
(2)The tenant may give 2 days notice of termination of the tenancy.
(3)If neither the lessor nor the tenant give notice of termination of the
tenancy, the rent abates for the period that the premises are unable to be
used for habitation, but the tenancy resumes when they are able to be used
again.
138. The L&D Report of 19 July 2020 recommended that, on the basis of the
presence of friable asbestos, access to the Cottage be restricted and an
environmental clean be undertaken. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the
presence of the dust in the kitchen and the bedroom, as identified in the L&D
Report, rendered the property uninhabitable until the premises was
appropriately cleaned.
139. I am satisfied that ACM dust was placed on the kitchen bench sometime
between the inspection by Mr Hengst on 28 June 2018 and the L&D assessment
on 19 July 2018. The property was certainly uninhabitable from this time.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! 140. I am not satisfied that the property was rendered uninhabitable at an earlier date.
The tenants ask that I find that the act of installing the shelving was sufficient to
render the property uninhabitable. I appreciate the tenants’ concern about the
consequences of this act, being the possible presence of friable asbestos dust.
However, I do not have the evidence before me to conclude that this alone
rendered the property uninhabitable. I do not know how Mr Kunkler installed
the shelves, whether dust fell to the ground when he did, whether precautions
were taken or whether the property became habitable again later. The evidence
about whether the property was vacuumed is inconsistent. Nor can I conclude
that the ACM dust collected by L&D from under the bed came from drilling
into the walls. While there are several competing scenarios, one of the more
likely is that the dust was placed under the bed at the same time as it was placed
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
on the kitchen bench. The tenants bear the onus of proof and must establish, on
the balance of probabilities, that the property was uninhabitable as at August
2017. 54 They have not discharged the burden of proof of establishing that the
installation of the shelves rendered the Cottage uninhabitable from that date or
that ACM dust was present at an earlier time than the dust on the kitchen bench.
141. I note, as an aside, that the RT Act does not clearly deal with a situation, like
this, where the premises may be uninhabitable by reason of a hidden risk or
danger, but the tenant remains in occupation. It may well have been the
legislature’s intention that the tenancy continue, but that the rent be liable to be
refunded in full, as the premises should not have been let. This is the position
54 See Faulder v Tran [2018] ACAT 2 at [49]
contended by the tenants, and it is not inconsistent with the wording of the
legislation. However, the position is not beyond doubt. Clauses 86 and 86(1)
refer to a process for terminating the agreement where the premises being
‘uninhabitable’. However, clause 86(2) provides that where this process is not
followed, “the rent abates” for the period that “the premises are unable to be
used for habitation,” but then somewhat incongruently says that “the tenancy
resumes when they are able to be used again.” Does this suggest that the
intention was that both the rent and the tenancy abated for the relevant period?
Or merely the rent? The language is rather unclear. If the tenancy abates and the
tenant remains in the premises, would an implied tenancy arise? Or an
occupancy? A licence? A cessation of the tenancy could have serious
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
consequences both parties, particularly the tenant, yet if only the rent abates, do
the parties continue to have obligations under the lease too? Also, is there a
distinction to be drawn between a legally ‘uninhabitable’ property and one
“unable to be used for habitation”? The distinction may be splitting hairs, but in
this case, the property unquestionably was used for habitation following the
work on the walls. The question is whether it should have been. Ultimately,
however, these are not matters I need to determine.
142. Turning back to the question at hand: Is it possible to identify a date when the
ACM dust was placed on the kitchen bench?
143. While I cannot determine an exact date that the property became uninhabitable,
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
such that rent abated under pursuant to clause 87(3) of the Standard Terms, I am
satisfied that the latest date would be 19 July 2018. This is a date I can be
positively satisfied that the property was contaminated by friable asbestos and
required professional cleaning before it could be lived in again. No party was in
doubt as to the situation. Pursuant to Standard Terms 87 of the RT Act, no rent
is payable for the Cottage from that date, notwithstanding that the tenants left
some personal property in it. The tenants’ rent abated in full from 18 July 2018
and they are not liable to pay rent accrued from this date.
The lessor’s claim for outstanding rent
144. The lessor calculated rent arrears of $15,570. However, Mr Hurst-Meyers
conceded, at hearing, that the rent ledger may be inaccurate.55 It appears to have
been created for the proceedings. The lessor does not appear to have maintained
a regular rent ledger or other systematic manner of recording rent received. This
is a breach of clause 33 of the Standard Terms, which provides:
33 (1)The lessor must keep, or cause to be kept, records of the payment of
rent.
(2)Those records must be retained for a period of not less than 12 months
after the end of the tenancy.
145. Still, it does not follow that the tenants are relieved from the obligation to pay
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! rent. The obligation remains, notwithstanding the inadequate records. The onus
is on the lessor to prove that rent is owed, and how much, and this can be
difficult where, as here, the records are not reliable or up to date.
146. It is not in dispute that the tenants did not pay rent for the period 23 May 2018
to the date they vacated and there were inconsistencies with payment prior to
that. They removed their belongings on 10 August 2018 and their pets sometime
before that. Based on the evidence before it, it appears that arrears of rent, as at
this date, were $4,450, assuming a weekly rent of $350. I am satisfied that rent
abated, due to the property being uninhabitable, from 19 July 2018. Absent any
offset, the tenants owe rent for the period 23 May 2018 to 19 July 2018, a
period of eight weeks and two days, which is $2,900 at $350 per week. I deal
with the lessor’s claim for contra below. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
The water issue
147. It is not disputed that for several weeks between September and October 2017,
there was ‘barely any’ water available on the property, for washing, drinking or
bathing. The lessor says water was provided to the tenants, but as to how much,
the only evidence available is a Facebook conversation between Mr Hurst-
Meyers and Mr Kunkler indicating that the tenants were provided with 10 litres
of water.56 This is not an adequate supply for several weeks. A failure of water
is an urgent repair pursuant to clause 60 of the Standard Terms and the lessor
55 Transcript of proceedings 7 December 2018 pages 347-348
56 Exhibit A1
may be liable for compensation should repairs not be attended to. Indeed, it may
well be that the failure of the water supply meant the property was uninhabitable
during this period. While I note the lessor’s position that water supply may be
restricted on a rural property, there is nothing in the documentation to suggest
that the lessor advised the tenants of this, and nor did the lessor seek an
endorsed term57 that provided for such contingencies. Nonetheless, the tenants
were offered one weeks rent reduction as compensation, and they accepted that
as compensation. The Tribunal declines to go behind that now.
The tenants’ claim for asbestos decontamination and loss of personal property
148. Some of the tenants’ personal property required an environmental clean and
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! some of the rest was disposed of.
149. Clause 55(1) of the Standard Terms imposes an obligation upon a lessor to
maintain a property in a reasonable state of repair, having regard to the
condition of the premises at the commencement of the tenancy. The lessor is
liable for a breach of this section, notwithstanding that they may have used their
best endeavours to comply.
150. Clause 52 of the Standard Terms provides that the lessor must not cause or
permit any interference with the reasonable peace, comfort or privacy of the
tenant in the use by the tenant of the premises.
151. Section 83(1)(d) of the RT Act empowers the Tribunal to make an order
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
requiring the payment of compensation for loss caused by the breach of the
residential tenancy agreement, including a breach of the lessor’s obligation to
maintain the premises.
152. As per the discussion above, I am satisfied that a person other than the lessor,
likely maliciously, placed the ACM dust on the kitchen bench. Accordingly, I
am not satisfied that the ACM dust in the bedroom or the kitchen was due to the
lessor’s failure to maintain the premises.
57 See section 10 of the RT Act which provide a means by which the parties to a residential
tenancy agreement may seek endorsement by the ACAT of a term that is inconsistent with
the Standard Terms.
153. However, I am satisfied that the earlier penetration of the walls, which may also
have resulted in asbestos contamination of the tenant’s property, was due, at
least in part, to the lessor’s failure to advise the tenants of the presence of
asbestos, or to warn them of the risk by providing an asbestos advice. The
lessor’s agent likely also contributed to the situation by installing shelving and
thereby implying it was safe to do so, whether or not he expressly told the
tenants as much.
154. The tenants abandoned the Cottage because they became aware on the presence
of bonded asbestos in the sheeting used for the walls. They were, rightly,
concerned that the installation of the shelves on those walls may have
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! contaminated the Cottage, and their belongings, with friable asbestos dust. The
magnitude of the risk was not known, and remains unknown, but it was
reasonable that the tenants sought to mitigate whatever risk there was by leaving
the premises and leaving their property in it. The tenants would likely have been
within their rights to seek to have their personal property tested or cleaned
because of this breach.
155. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the lessor’s failure to provide either an asbestos
report as required by section 12(3)(f) of the RT Act, or to otherwise advise the
tenants of the presence of bonded asbestos on the property, led to the tenants
vacating the property out of concern for their safety. 58
156. In the intervening period, the Cottage certainly came to be contaminated. Does Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
it follow that the lessor is responsible for the damage to the tenant’s personal
property, weeks later, by reason of this event?
157. In Wicks & Stevens v the Hurst-Meyers Charity [2019] ACAT 92, a case with
some similarities to the present, Senior Member Anforth observed that:
The owner had a duty to investigate the existence of asbestos and to notify
the occupants, both immediately before and during the tenancy. They did
not do so, and this failure caused the train of events that led to the
termination of the agreement which is also a breach of the occupants’
58 I note that the tenants claim to have been positively advised by Mr Kunkler that the property
did not contain asbestos, but I do not need to be satisfied that conversation happened, as I
am satisfied that the lessor’s failure to advise the tenants of the possible presence of asbestos
is sufficient to have, in the circumstances, lead to a breach of their right to quiet enjoyment.
right to quiet enjoyment. It led to the need for the occupants to pack and
move with its attendant costs, stresses and inconveniences.
158. Much the same happened in this case, albeit rather than packing and moving,
the tenants left their belonging in situ, 59 and were later unable to recover them.
159. In determining whether a breach of contract causes loss or damage, the ‘but for’
test is generally applied, but this can be difficult where there are concurrent
causes of the damage, or where there is, as here, a sequence of tangled events.
‘But for’ the lessor’s failure to meet its obligations to provide the asbestos
advice, would the tenants’ property have been contaminated? I am satisfied that
if the tenants had been properly warned that the walls were ACM, they would
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! not have drilled into them. I am also satisfied that Mr Kunkler’s actions in
approving the installation of the shelving, and indeed in assisting it, were also a
causative factor. What would have happened had they not drilled into the walls
is impossible to know, but it is unlikely they would have abandoned the
property or their personal property in the circumstances that they did.
160. The rule in Hadley v Baxendale [1854] EngR 296; (1854) 9 Exch 341 provides
that damages will not be awarded if the loss is too remote. I am satisfied that the
complete loss of the tenant’s personal property by reason of the intervention of a
third party depositing asbestos dust in the house is too remote. However, the
need to temporarily vacate the property while an inspection is undertaken, and
the need for an environmental clean or disposal of personal property located in
the bedroom and potentially contaminated by asbestos from the drilling of holes Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
in the walls is a foreseeable loss.
161. The tenants’ evidence as to the value of the personal property they lost was not
convincing. I completely understand that it is impossible to produce receipts of
precise descriptions of personal property bought years before, but nonetheless
there is a burden of evidence that must be met, and the tenants did not meet it.
Moreover, it is not possible, on the evidence before me, to separate what
property was lost due to the drilling and early vacation of the property, and what
needed to be disposed of because of the malicious contamination later.
59 A latin term meaning ‘in the original place’
162. The substantiated damage is the stress and inconvenience that flowed from the
failure of the lessor to advise or warn of the presence of ACM at the
commencement of the lease.
163. I will allow $2,320 compensation for the breach of quiet enjoyment that
foreseeably followed from the lessor’s failure to provide the required
information about the presence of asbestos in the Cottage. This sum reflects the
cost and inconvenience of having their personal property decontaminated
($1,320), the subsequent loss of their personal property, including the loss of
‘priceless’ sentimental items, the stress associated with the discovery of the
asbestos, and the inconvenience of having to physically vacate the premises
early. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
The lessor pay for Lancaster and Dickenson asbestos assessment report - $753.50
164. The L&D report revealed the presence of asbestos in the property. The report
was commissioned at the tenants’ expense, but it is foreseeable that a tenant
who is concerned about asbestos, and not advised about it in breach of the RT
Act, would incur such an expense. The lessor is to pay for the report.
The lessor’s claims
165. The lessor made a number of claims against the tenants. The lessor’s
counterclaim for outstanding rent is considered above. I address the other claims
below.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
The lessor’s claim for contra
166. Under the terms of the agreement, the tenants had the option of performing
‘contra’ in lieu of $100 a week for rent.
167. Neither what the contra was meant to be, nor how it would be valued, was
defined in the RT Agreement. There does not appear to have been any clear oral
agreement either. Broadly, ‘contra’ seems to have work as directed, including
gardening style activities, transporting, fencing, goods, assisting with campers
and guests at events held at Caloola, There was also some discussion during the
hearing about the tenants assisting with the establishment of horse riding
activities on the farm, apparently using their horses.
168. The tenants say they performed the work, the lessor says they did not.
169. In any case, I agree with the decisions of Senior Member Anforth in Wicks and
Senior Member Mulligan in Khan, asking consideration other than in the form
of money is a breach of section 15(1) of the RT Act. A term that provides for
contra would be in breach of section 9(2) of the RT Act, which provides:
(2) A term of a residential tenancy agreement is void if it is inconsistent
with this Act (other than a standard residential tenancy term).
170. It may be permissible for a lessor to offer or for the parties to agree to (but not
require) a rent reduction in exchange for services rendered, particularly on, for
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! example, an ad hoc basis. However, there must be some way of recording and
assessing the work performed or any agreement reached about that reduction. In
this case, there were no timesheets, acknowledgments of work performed or a
record of any agreement reached. There was no agreement as to how to value
any work performed. In the absence of any rent records and the contra issue, it
is not possible to determine whether any rent was owing for unperformed
contra, and I disallow the claim. I take the same approach in relation to the
tenants’ claim for payment in respect of contra allegedly performed. Neither
party can establish their case on the balance of probabilities.
The lessor’s claims for professional invoices
171. There are two bases upon which a lessor may claim compensation for damage
under the RT Act:
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
(a) The tenants intentionally or negligently damaged the property or
permitted such damage60; or
(b) The tenants failed to return the property in the condition at the
commencement of the tenancy, minus fair wear and tear. 61
172. Additionally, in the case of cleaning, cleaning costs may be claimed where the
tenants failed to return the property in the state of cleanliness it was at the
commencement of the tenancy. 62
60 Standard Terms, clause 63.
61 Section 31(a); Standard Terms clause 64(b)
173. The lessor, as the applicant in relation to these claims, bears the onus of proof.
174. Under the RT Act, the starting position is any consideration of a claim for
damage made by a lessor against a tenant is a consideration of the condition
report at the start of the tenancy. Section 29 of the RT Act sets out the process
for the preparation of such a report, and section 30(1) provides that where the
appropriate steps have been complied with, a statement in a condition report
about the state of repair or general condition of the premises is evidence of that
state of repair or general condition on the day the tenant was given the condition
report. There is no ingoing condition report before the Tribunal for the Cottage,
nor any outgoing report.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
175. In his oral evidence, Mr Hurst-Meyers claimed that he “filled in” a condition
report and provided it to the tenants on 7 June 2017.63 He was not sure that
Ms Wellings took a copy with her.64 Although he suggested in evidence that he
might have a copy in a filing cabinet at home, he never provided it to the
Tribunal. Even assuming that Mr Hurst-Meyers did give the tenants a copy of
the condition report, it would be of little value. As at 7 June 2017, the previous
tenant had not vacated the property, and the report would have been of little or
no evidentiary weight as to the condition of the house when the tenants moved
in over a week later.
176. Section 30(3) of the RT Act provides that in the absence of an ingoing condition
report, evidence by the tenant about the state of repair and general condition of Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
the premises is evidence of the general condition of the property on the day the
tenant took possession. The exact effect of this provision is not clear, but on
balance I consider that at the very least it requires that I give consideration to
the tenants’ oral evidence, and weigh it against the lessor’s evidence.
177. On that basis, I have considered the following claims by the lessor.
Cleaning costs of $800
62 Standard Terms, clause 64(a)
63 Transcript of proceedings 15 July 2019 page 196
64 Transcript of proceedings 17 July 2019 page 267
178. The lessor seeks recovery of the cost of a contract cleaner, Mr Bahadur,
cleaning the property. Mr Bahadur was cleaning at Caloola for four days65, one
day of which was spent cleaning the Cottage. 66
179. Mr Hurst-Meyers submitted that one of his contractors, Mr Shepherd, cleaned
the property on 23 June 2017. Mr Shepherd appears to have recalled vacuuming
the carpets after the previous tenants moved out, but there is no invoice or other
documentary evidence to support this and Mr Shepherd had no record of having
done so.67 As there is no evidence of professional cleaning being conducted
before the tenants moved in, I do not accept that the tenants were required to
return it to Mr Hurst-Meyers in a standard commensurate with a professional
clean. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
180. I accept that the previous tenant cleaned the Cottage to a reasonable standard. I
accept the evidence of the tenants that the Cottage was not pristinely clean when
they moved in, and that they had to clean it. However, I don’t accept the
property was not reasonably clean. Individual standards differ. The subjective
nature of cleanliness is one reason why it is important that the parties prepare an
ingoing condition report.
181. The evidence of Mr Shepherd is that the property was a mess when he attended
on 23 June 2018, 68 with clothing on the floor and various other items strewn
around, including animal faeces on the floor and empty food containers.
However, the question before the Tribunal is not how the property was during Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
the tenancy, but the condition of the property when it was returned to the lessor.
This is especially the case given there were no regular inspection reports and
there is no evidence that concerns were raised with the tenants.
182. Photographs filed by applicant purport to show the property as at 7 to 10 August
2018.69 Accepting for present purposes that the dates are accurate, they show a
property that is worn and grimy, with calcium build-up in the shower, scuff
marks and some damage to doors, blinds and the like. It also shows that the
65 Transcript of proceedings 19 July 2019 page 400, lines 40-42
66 Transcript of proceedings 19 July 2019 page 402 lines 34-35
67 Transcript of proceedings 14 August 2019 page 144, lines 4-9
68 Transcript of proceedings 14 August 2019 page 141, lines 28-32
69 Exhibit A1 pages 66-124
carpet was removed from the main bedroom. The photographs are not
particularly clear, but the property does not appear to be filthy.
183. Another of the lessor’s contractors, Mr Bahadur, gave evidence that he
undertook cleaning at the request of the lessor in early September 201870, well
after the tenants vacated. He described a property in a very poor condition, with
a “black thing on the toilet seat” 71 filthy carpets and mould in the bath, dirt
,
behind the garage door and a fridge that needed wiping out. The tenants’
photographs do show a black stain in the toilet. However, the Cottage did not
have a bath or a garage, and the tenants also deny that they had a fridge. A
comment made by Mr Baradur’s that “all of them…they need lots of
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! maintenance before they rent it out”72 suggests that he may have cleaned several
properties. The discrepancies between his evidence and that physical description
of the house means I cannot be satisfied he was giving evidence about the
Cottage.
184. Moreover, if Mr Bahadur’s dates are correct, he attended the property after it
had been cleared for entry by L&D Consulting. The clearance certificate issued
in the wake of the removal suggests that carpets had been removed from one
room and an environmental clean undertaken of the bedroom and the kitchen.
Mr Hurst-Meyers’s evidence was that the environmental clean removed all of
the carpets, the curtains, and basically stripped the entire property.73 In addition
to the asbestos cleaners, other persons also entered the property between 13
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
June 2018 and 10 August 2018. This may have contributed in some way to the
disordered state of the property.
185. In any case, the property was initially vacated because of the tenants’ fears
about friable asbestos, and then ultimately abandoned because of the presence
of it. The presence of that asbestos made it impossible for the tenants to clean
the premises and return it to the state they had acquired it in. The property
needed to be cleaned in any case. The tenants are not liable for this cost.
70 Transcript of proceedings 19 July 2019 page 400 lines 29-33; note the invoice at R16 is
misdated.
71 Transcript of proceedings 19 July 2019 page 402, line 4
72 Transcript of proceedings 19 July 2019 page 402 lines 8-10
73 Transcript of proceedings 27 November 2018 page 296
Twin City Plumbing - $502.15
186. The lessor seeks reimbursement for repair work undertaken to the plumbing on
28 June 2018. The invoice is unclear as to the nature of that work. The tenants
were not living at the property as this time.
187. The lessor says that the tenants are responsible for this cost because they
“sabotaged” the water pipes during the tenancy – in other words, that they
negligently or deliberately damaged the water infrastructure. Mr Hurst-Meyers
made this allegation, forcefully, on several occasions, but no evidence was
offered beyond the assertion. The tenants deny it.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! 188. Mr McInerney, the director of Twin City Plumbing gave evidence about the
leak, stating that “there were leaks everywhere and we did what we could.”74
Mr McInerney was not able to confirm that the leaks were deliberate, only that
they had not had leaks like that before mid-2018.75 There were no other
witnesses, and no evidence beyond assertion. It is not even apparent that this
alleged act of vandalism was reported to the police. In the circumstances, I
cannot be satisfied that the tenants are liable for the plumbing repairs. This
claim is dismissed.
Kosta Pizania - $2,800
189. This claim relates to repairs of damage and removal of rubbish the lessor says
the tenants left behind when they abandoned the property.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
190. The claim is supported by a witness statement from Mr Pizania dated 1
November 2018 and an invoice dated 18 July 2019.76 The invoice is dated a
year after the tenants abandoned the property. It was, on Mr Pinanza’s evidence,
constructed solely for the purpose of these proceedings. I place minimal weight
on the invoice.
191. I accept that the tenants did leave some personal belongings behind on the
premises. Some of these items, such as the pig pen, were outside the Cottage.
74 Transcript of proceedings 19 July 2019 page 423, lines 17 to 18.
75 Transcript of proceedings 19 July 2019 page 400, lines 32-36
76 Exhibit R16 at
Mr Bahadur confirmed he saw some general rubbish. AustLII AustLI 77 Some of this property
the tenants likely had no opportunity to remove before they vacated the
property, fearing it uninhabitable. However, other detritus left around the
outside of the building could have been collected along with the horses, or the
other animal or at some other time after the property had been decontaminated.
Mr Hurst-Meyers requested that they do this. 78 I am not satisfied of is what
portion of that rubbish was the tenants, and what portion was somebody else’s
particularly given the numerous tradespersons who had attended by September
2018, but I am not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the tenants must
pay some proportion of the rubbish removal costs. I award $100.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Painting house and laying carpet - $1,000
192. The lessor seeks payment of an invoice from Wayne Barrett for “paint of
premises + repair” 79 The receipt was written in July 2019, a long time after the
work was completed on 10 August 2018.
193. In the absence on an ingoing condition report, the Tribunal does not know the
condition or age the paintwork at the time the tenancy was commenced. I am
not able to determine whether the need to repaint the premises was due, whether
in part or in whole, to fair wear and tear or to damage.
194. Regular repainting is a matter for the lessor. Repainting to repair negligent or
deliberate damage to the property by a tenant may be recoverable. There is no
evidence that the tenants negligently damaged the paintwork. I am not satisfied Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
that there is any evidence in support of the contention that the tenants should
pay to have the property completely repainted. There in insufficient information
on the invoice to consider apportioning the costs. This application is dismissed.
Bathroom repair - $1,188
195. The lessors sought recovery of costs for repairs to the bathroom made by M2M
Building Services. The invoice is dated 15 July 2018. The invoice covers
sheeting over a wall in the shower invoice with villawood, wet seal, grouting,
77 Transcript of proceedings 19 July 2019 page 406, lines 15, 22-23
78 Exhibit R12, Tab 54
79 Exhibit R16
removing debris and sealing drill holes in the walls to the dwelling. Restoring
wet seal and grout are likely maintenance issues.
196. The drill holes are clearly damage, and there appears to have been a hole to a
wall in the shower recess as well. There is evidence from Mr Margerison that,
while living in the Cottage, he put a piece of cardboard on the shower wall, to
cover a hole about the size of a bread plate.80 The existence of such a hole, in
what may be asbestos sheeting, is itself concerning, and suggests that the
property was in poor condition and in need of repairs when the tenants moved
in. Still, bathroom aside, the walls appear to have been in serviceable condition.
The drill holes are clearly damage.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
197. In the absence of an ingoing condition report, I am unsure as to the extent of the
damage at the time of the commencement of the tenancy. There is no evidence
that the tenants negligently or deliberately damaged the bathroom walls. The
tenants are, however, required to restore the property to the condition the
received it, including removing ‘improvements’ such as shelves, even if they
had the lessor’s agreement to make them. 81 I will allow $100 for the sealing of
the drill holes in the Cottage.
Broken window - $543
198. The lessor says that the tenants broke the window, and the tenants deny this.
Again, there is no ingoing condition report. The tenants provided photographs
that showed that a crack existed in the kitchen window prior to the tenancy Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
commencing.82 This is the only credible evidence before the Tribunal and it
suggests the crack predates the tenancy. The lessor must establish, on the
balance of probabilities, that the tenants negligently or intentionally damaged
the window. There is insufficient evidence to establish this. I dismiss the claim.
199. I note for completeness that it is unclear that the claim has been paid. The only
evidence that the lessor could provide was a bank statement indicating that a
payment of $543 was made to somebody. There is no other supporting
evidence. For reasons I have stated above, I do not accept the uncorroborated
80 Transcript of proceedings 7 December 2018 page 386, lines 8-43
81 Maroney v Bullard [2016] ACAT 33
82 Exhibit A1
evidence of Mr Hurst-Meyers and do not accept that this invoice relates to the
window in the Cottage.
Replacement carpets
200. Again, with no incoming condition report, it is difficult to know whether and to
what degree the carpets damaged during the tenancy. It is also unclear how old
the carpet was before replacement, or whether it had met its life expectancy of
10 years.83 In the circumstances, I am not satisfied that the carpets are of more
than nominal value in any case, and will not award the lessor compensation. I
dismiss this claim.
Electricity usage +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
201. The lessor claims electricity bills of $2,120, stated in the claim at R16 to be
$2,720.90 less “$600 for Adam and Justin James”). It is not entirely clear how
this amount is calculated. The lessor relies on a “statement of account” dated
22 October 2018 for “cottage & workshop” that shows the outstanding
electricity debt as at 22 June 2018 as $2720.90. 84
202. In most tenancies, the tenants will have the electricity account connected in their
own names and be responsible to the utility provider for the bill. Where this
does not happen, the tenant is liable for costs for the consumption of
electricity, 85 but not the supply. However, a lessor is responsible for the cost of
services for which there is not a separate metering device.86 The Cottage was
not separately metered, sharing the connection with another building on the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
property, the “workshop”. Accordingly the tenants are not responsible for the
electricity bill.
203. As there was no separate metering for the horse paddocks, the tenants are not
responsible for that either.
204. Even if this were not the case, or even if I could accept that no electricity was
used at the workshop and therefore the meter was effectively only for the
Cottage, the lessor has not put before the Tribunal the relevant electricity bills.
83 ATO Depreciation Schedule
84 R2 at Tab 29
85 RT Act standard terms clause 46
86 RT Act standard terms clause 42(c)
There are only two bills of relevance. The first is the email coversheet of a bill
for the “cottage and workshop” ending 9 July 2018. It does not separate
consumption and supply cost. The second is an update to that bill, titles “final
electricity” to 19 June 2018, which does break down supply and consumption
for the additional period, but not for the previous one. 87 Other bills filed by the
lessor88 include a bill for “Caloola Farm & Portables” and another is a bill for
“Farmhouse Caloola Farmhouse 2”. These appear to be irrelevant. I note the
lessor says he gave the bills to the Ms Wellings. 89 She denies this, but it is of no
consequence whether he gave them to her or not. The matter was in dispute, and
replacement bills, which are in the lessors name, could have been obtained from
the utility provider, but were not. I dismiss this claim.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Animal agistment
205. There is conflicting evidence about the arrangements for the tenants’ animals.
Their agistment costs appear to have been included in the original agreement,
apparently on the lessor’s assumption that the tenants would assist with a riding
school or riding activities, a venture that never came to pass. After the tenants
vacated, the lessor attempted to unilaterally impose agistment rates. Even if the
latter were effective, this not a matter that falls within the ambit of the
residential tenancy agreement and it is not a matter that I can adjudicate under
the RT Act. I dismiss this claim in its entirety.
Asbestos removal
206. In order to find that the tenants were responsible for the cost of asbestos Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
removal, I would need to be satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that they
placed the ACM dust on the kitchen bench and under the bed in the bedroom.
For reasons stated above, I am not so satisfied. I therefore dismiss this claim.
Conclusion
207. The tenants’ claim against the first respondent is dismissed.
208. The second respondent is to pay to the tenants the sum of $3073.30:
87 Exhibit R1 page 53.
88 Exhibit R2, document at Tab 46
89 Transcript of proceedings 14 December 2018 page 564
(a) $753.30, being the cost of the Lancaster and Dickenson asbestos
assessment; and
(b) $2,320 compensation for loss occasioned by breach of quiet enjoyment.
209. The tenants are to pay to the lessor $3,100:
(a) the outstanding rent of $2,900; and
(b) $100 for garbage removal; and
(c) $100 for repair of the drill holes;
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! to be offset against the amount at order 2.
210. The Office of Rental Bonds on behalf of the Territory is directed to release the
sum of $36.70 to the lessor and the remainder of the bond to the tenants.
………………………………..
Presidential Member H Robinson
Dates of hearing 6 August 2018, 13 November 2018, 20
November 2018, 27 November 2018, 7
December 2018, 14 December 2018, 21-22 May
2019, 15 July 2019, 19 July 2019, 14 August
Solicitors for the Applicant: Mr Faulder, ACT Tenants Union
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi