IN THE TENANCY TRIBUNAL
IN CANBERRA IN THE TT 232 of 1998
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
BETWEEN:
Bruce Gibbons and Robyn Gibbons
Applicant
AND:
Dungell Pty Limited
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Respondent
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT OF PRESIDENT M. A. SOMES
DATED THE 17TH DAY OF DECEMBER 1998
A Notice of Dispute was filed by Bruce Gibbons and Robyn Gibbons (the tenants)
against Dungell Pty Limited (the landlord) dated the 8th of June 1998 in which the
following ground was alleged as the basis of the dispute:
“The fact that the fixed percentage increase of 1997 was not implemented but the
1997 increase was implemented in 1998 together with the 1998 increase (clause
36.1(f)”.
This Notice of Dispute came on for a conference before the Registrar and subsequently
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
a document was filed by Pamela Ayson whom I assume was an agent for the tenants
formally discontinuing the Notice of Dispute.
Subsequent to this document being received an application was filed by the landlord
seeking an order for costs in relation to the filing of the Notice of Dispute.
The basis of the costs application is that there was never a dispute between the parties
to which the provisions of the Tenancy Tribunal Act (the Act) applied. The question of
whether costs might be awarded came on for hearing before me on 27 November 1998
and following hearing of some argument and the handing up of submissions I reserved
my decision.
Section 52 of the Act is in the following terms:
“The parties to a hearing shall bear their own costs unless the Tribunal orders
otherwise.”
tl AustLll AustLll AustLll
There is a similar provision in relation to hearings occurring before the Registrar and
this is to be found in section 32 of the Act. I raised with Counsel, during the
submissions, the question as to whether in the particular circumstances which exist in
relation to this matter there was any jurisdiction in the Tribunal to even consider the
question of costs. This concern arose by the presence of the words “a hearing” both in
section 52 and section 32.
I have considered the matter further and I am of the view that in the particular
circumstances of this dispute there is no jurisdiction in the Tribunal to make an order for
costs whether it believes such an order to be appropriate or otherwise as there has not
been a hearing.
Hearing is defined in section 3 of the Act as follows:
“”hearing” means -
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
(a) a hearing by the Registrar under Part V;
(b) a hearing by the Tribunal under section 35; or
(c) the hearing of an application for an interim order under section 53.”
Hearing is defined in the Oxford English Dictionary, inter alia,:
“The action of actively giving ear, listening (e.g. to a lecture, sermon, play, etc.).”
Hearing is also defined in Butterworths Australian Legal Dictionary 1997 at page 545
as follows:
“A proceeding, conducted by a court, tribunal or administrator with a view to resolving
issues of fact or law, in which oral evidence may be taken and documentary and real
evidence tendered. A hearing may be by way of oral or written submission. Legal
representation may not be necessary, or even permitted. Where a decision maker
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
would not be able to resolve inconsistencies in the evidence purely on written
submissions, an oral hearing may be necessary to satisfy the requirement of
procedural fairness: Daguio v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (1986) 71
ALR 173. A hearing is a generic term referring to any proceeding where argument is
heard to render a decision. A trial is a hearing, although hearings may be conducted
with less formality than a trial. Bodies conducting hearings, especially tribunals and
administrators, need not be required to observe the laws of evidence, for example, the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal: (CTH) Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975 s
33(1)(c). Hearings may be conducted adversarially or inquisitorially, for example by
the National Crime Authority: (CTH National Criminal Authority Act 1984 SS 11,25.
Where a matter is listed for hearing but does not proceed because the judge
becomes unavailable, such a hearing is deemed ‘discontinued’ without the fault of the
parties . . .
Various other texts refer to hearings and all involve a concept of there being some form
of evidence or activity taking place before a court or tribunal as, for example, in a trial.
In this particular matter there was never a hearing in that sense before the Tribunal and
it is my view that in those circumstances the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to consider an
order for costs.
It might be argued by the landlord that there had been a hearing before the Registrar. It
is my understanding of section 32 that any consideration of an application for costs
arising out of the hearing before the Registrar needs to be made to the Registrar and
considered by the Registrar. The Tribunal in my view has no jurisdiction to hear an
order for costs involving a hearing before the Registrar.
I am of the view that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to hear the application brought by
the landlord and it is therefore not necessary to consider whether an order for costs
would have been appropriate in the circumstances of the filing of the Dispute. I would
only mention as a matter of guidance that there seems on the face of the material
before me never to have been a dispute which would have enabled the tenants to have
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! invoked the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi