UstLll AustLII AustLI
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
CITATION: Gino Bartone v Courtenay Hollis and Amanda Downes [2008]
ACTRTT (16)
RT 449 of 2008
Catchwords: No point of principle.
Tribunal: A. Anforth, Member
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust
Date:26 September 2008
GINA BARTONE
(Applicant/Lessor)
AND:
COURTENAY HOLLIS and AMANDA DOWNES
(Respondent/Tenant)
DECISION
Tribunal :A. Anforth, Member
Date:31 July 2008
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Decision:
1. The Tenants counter claim is adjourned until Monday the 25th day of August 2008
at 10.00am
2. The Lessor’s application is dismissed
3. The Office of Rental Bonds is ordered to release the whole of the bond to the
Tenants
4. The Tenants are to serve on the Lessor a copy of their counter claim.
…………………………….
Member
GINA BARTONE
(Applicant/Lessor)
AND
COURTENAY HOLLIS and AMANDA DOWNES
(Respondent/Tenant)
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. This matter is a rental bond dispute in relation to premises at 53 Boronia Drive,
O’Connor in the ACT. The tenancy commenced on 13 December 2006 for a fixed
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! term of 12 months at a rent of $535.00 per week. The premises were new and the
tenants were the first occupants. The landscaping of the premises had not been
completed at the commencement of the tenancy.
2. The tenants served notice on the lessor dated 12 June of their intention to vacate
the premise by reason of the lessor’s breaches of their privacy. The tenants in fact
vacated the premises and paid rent to 10 July 2007 which was part way through
the fixed term. A new tenant was found and the new tenancy commenced on 14
July 2008.
3. The Office of Rental Bonds (ORB) paid $1662.11 of the original bond to the
tenants and retained the balance of $477.89. The
4. The matter was referred to the Tribunal by the ORB.
5. On 30 June 2008 the lessor filed a statement with the Tribunal setting out his case.
The lessor claimed:
(a) rent for the 11-13 July inclusive being $229.28 Must!Il Aust!Il AustLI AustLi
(b) outstanding water consumed by the tenants during the tenancy of $27.09
(c) the costs of replacing garden plants of $221.00 said to have died due to the
tenants’ failure to water them.
6. The matter was listed before the Tribunal on 1 July 2008. There was no
appearance of the lessor and the tenants appeared in person. The application was
adjourned to 31 July 2008.
7. The tenants filed a statutory declaration setting out their response to the lessor’s
claim which read as follows:
We, Mr. Courten ay Hollis, Ms. Amand a Downes and Ms. Meag an Downe s make the follow ing
declar ation under the Statutory Declarations Act 1959:
(a) Mr. Courte na y Hollis and Ms. Amanda Downe s undertoo k a 12 month lease of 53 Boronia Drive
th
O'Conno r ACT 2602 through the property manage r (Place Real Estate ) Mr. Brian Nanca rrow on 8
Decem ber 2006. [1]
(b) A Ms. Meag an Downe s joined this lease shortly after.
(c) This lease was signed under the conditions that:
(i) The landlord, Mr. Gino Bartone , will be landsc aping the prope rty , and as such we, then
tenants, were not respo nsible for removing the curre nt weeds in the garden beds and lawn.
(ii) The landlord , Mr. Gino Barton e, has provid ed a teleph one line connec tion ,
(iii) The landlo rd, Mr. Gino Bartone , will construct a pergola for the backya rd,
(iv) The tenants, Mr. Courte na y Hollis, Ms. Amanda Downes and Ms. Meaga n Downe s, are to
water the plants to the best of their ability with consid er atio n to water restric tion s.
(d) The landlor d, Mr. Gino Bartone , never met items (i), (ii) and (iii) as agree d in the lease, and we,
the tenants, met item (iv). There was no phone line installed and our request for a line was rejected
by the landlor d. This meant that our alarm system did not work to its full ability and we had to rely
on the excessiv e use of our mobile phone s. (See section 47 of Tenan cy Agreem e nt.) Instea d of a
pergola an umbrella was assem ble d in the back yard. The plants were brand new, planted on top of
building materials and in need of water before we moved in, we were also in drought and under
strict water restrictio ns. [2] [10]
(e) The tenants, Mr. Courten ay Hollis, Ms. Aman da Down es and Ms. Meaga n Downe s reporte d the
follow ing defects to the prope rty manag er , Mr. Brian Nanc ar row :
(i) The weeds in the garden beds and lawn were getting out of control.
(ii) Every second plant is dying as they have been planted to close togeth er, and that we are
waterin g them on the assign ed watering days,
(iii) the dishwa she r is not bolted to the wall corre ctly and has fallen over on the tenants on
sever al occasions,
(iv) There are several bee and wasp nests aroun d the property and one of the tenants is
tLIIAustLII A highly allergic to bee/w asp stings.
(v) The letter box is not fixed to the ground correctly and could easily fall over on someon e,
(vi) The gate does not open/close corre ctly, and we, the tenants, felt our privac y and safety was
at risk as our back yard was exposed to the street. [3]
(f) The landlord , Mr. Gino Barton e , never made an effort to rectif y items (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v) and
(vi). (See sectio n 57 and 60m of tenancy Agreem e nt.)
(g) We, the tenants, were instructed to purchase a significa nt amount of weed killer at our own
expense, and spray onto all weed infecte d areas of the prope rty , as the property mana ger , Mr. Brian
Nanca rro w , insisted this would ensure the landlo rd, Mr. Gino Bartone , would landsca pe the prope rty
as agree d upon in the lease. Furthe rm ore , we inform ed the prope rty manage r when we complete d the
weed treatm ent ready for landsc aping , and the landlord still refuse d to landsca pe the prope rty . We
were then instructed to manually remove all dead weeds. These were the weeds that we were told to
leave when we signed the lease as we were told the garde n was being landsca pe d. (See sectio n 65 of
Tenan cy Agree me nt.) AUSEL !!
(h) We, the tenants, sited Mr. Gino Bartone , parked opposite the property on several occasio ns.
This made us feel intimidate d so we reporte d this to the property mana ge r, Mr. Brian Nanc a rrow as
we felt our privac y and safety was being jeopar dize d by the landlor d. After speakin g with our
neighbo urs who were also renting one of Mr. Bartone's prope rtie s, they informe d us that they were ASELII
having the same problems, (see section 52 of Tenancy Agreeme nt.) They also informed us that they had
requested that a phone line be connecte d and they were granted this, we however, were not. Their plants
had also died through no fault of their own. [4]
(i) A Ms. Meagan Downes and Ms. Amanda Downes took a day off work and sited the landlor d, Mr.
Gino Bartone, in the backyard of the property on Friday 8th June 2007 without the prior permission from
the tenants or the property manager. (See section 75 of Tenancy Agreem ent.) Furtherm ore Mr. Gino
Bartone verbally abused Ms. Meaga n Downe s and Ms. Amanda Downes. At this time a verbal
agreem ent was made between Ms. Amanda Downes and Mr. Gino Bartone that both parties were happy
to terminate the lease early. A Ms. Amanda Downes reporte d this immediately to Brain Nancar row, the
property manag er and informed him of our intentions to terminate the lease after Mr. Bartone breac hed
the contract. [4]
(j) We, the tenants, sent a written notice dated 12th June 2007 to vacate the property on 27th June 2007 to
the property manage r, Mr. Brian Nanca rrow , as we were concerne d about our privacy and safety at the
property and could no longer live under these conditions. (See section 90 of Tenan cy Agreem ent.) [4]
(k) We, the tenants receive d an email dated 12th June from the property manager, Mr. Brian Nancarrow ,
stating that the landlord had said it was acceptable to terminate the lease on the conditio n that
replac eme nt tenants move in. [5]
(l) We, the tenants, were told that if we did not manually remove the weeds and have the garden
prepared for landscaping prior to the final inspection, that our bond money would be withheld.
(m) We, the tenants, during the hours of 10.30am to 5:00pm on Saturda y 23rd June 2007 and Sunday
24th June 2007 manually remove d all weeds and building waste from the garden beds and lawn as we
could not afford to be without bond money. Furtherm ore, Mrs. Karen Downes and Mrs. Shirley Janson
assisted us during these days. Additionally this provide d us, the tenants, less time to find a new home
and organise moving arrangem ents. Time from work was taken off to achieve this. The waste was
disposed of at the tip at our expense.
(n) We, the tenants, vacated the property on Friday 6th July 2007 after replace ment tenants were found.
Rent was paid up until 10 July 2007. Ms. Amanda Downes and Ms. Meaga n Downes conducte d a final
inspection with the property manager, Mr. Brian Nancarro w on 9th July 2007. the property manager
agreed the property was left in an excelle nt condition and did not believe we were responsible for the
dead plants under the circumsta nces. Furtherm ore, the property manage r stated that he was instructe d
by the landlord , Mr. Gino Bartone, to withhold a portion of the bond money to recove r costs for plants
that had died. $27.09 was also held for water consum ption , we were not disputing this cost and agreed
to pay it. Bond was also held for 3 days rent for the period 11th -13th July 2007 which was the period of
time the house was vacant before the new tenants moved in on 14th July 2007. This period was not within
2 weeks of us giving notice and receivin g approval to vacate . See section 84 and 91c,d & e of Tenanc y
Agree ment. Had we of known our full rights we would have vacated with or without new tenants on the
27th June as stated in our notice to vacate. [6] [10]
(o) Actew A GL conducte d significa nt work in the O'Connor area to improve the sewera ge system,
resulting in a large portion of the backyard being dug up. Upon completion they returne d the backyard
to exactly the same state as they found it. However, the landlord, Mr. Bartone, complaine d to
Actew AG L and said they had remove d several plants from the backyard, and they must provide him
with new ones. Actew A GL took his word on this matter, and in fact delivere d approxim ately 20 plants
tLIIAustLIJ which the landlord then landscape d the garden with. This was in fact a blatant lie, as there were no
plants in the section of the backyard that was dug up. [7]
8. The tenants also filed a cross claim which read as follows:
Due to the circum stan ce s outline d in the Statuto ry Declar atio n, we believe we are entitle d to the
following compensation:
• Compe nsatio n for Breac h of Section 47 of the RTA: No telephon e line provided AUstLI
 For furthe r details refer to item (c)(ii) and (d) of the Statutory Decla ration
 The tenants were force d to use their mobile phone for all perso nal calls to frien ds
 and family both locally and interstate
AUSEL !!
 The tenants could not get intern et access
 The tenants were told there was a phone line provided when signing the lease and a
reque st for a line was then rejecte d by the lessor .
•Compe nsation for Breach of Section 52 of RTA: Continu ous interfe ren ce with reaso nable peace , ASELII
comfort and privacy
 For furthe r details refer to items (h) and (h)(i) of the Statutory Decla ration .
 The tenants were forced to keep their blinds closed and avoid use of the yard
 The tenants never felt comf orta ble or relaxe d during the entire lease after having spotted
the lessor sitting in his car outside the house on several occasion s.
 Tena nts were told by their property mana g er that the lessor had told him that it looked as
though we took good care of the inside of the house . The lessor was never given
permissio n to enter the house .
• Compe nsatio n for Breac h of Section 57 and 60(m) of the RTA: Failure to underta ke emerge nc y
repairs that led to the property being unsaf e and insecu re. Failure to landsc a pe garde n and constr uct
a pergola as promise d at the start of the lease .
 For furthe r details refer to items (d) of the Statutory Decla ration
 The tenants were unable to make use of the yard for both pleasure and drying of washing,
due to high amounts of dust in the air, several wasp nests, and an insecur e gate that could
not be closed .
 The tenants were unable to complete ly set up the alarm system due to the lack of a
telepho ne line
 The tenants had the dishwash er fall on top of them on numero us occasio ns because the
lessor failed to secur ely fit the dishwa she r after being advise d of the proble m .
• Compensation for Breac h of Section 65 of the RTA:
 For furthe r details refer to items (c)(i) and (g) of the Statutor y Decla ra tio n
 The tenants were blackm a ile d into improving the prope rty by remo ving weed s and
waste material to prepa re the garden for landsc a ping to ensure we would be given a
full bond refund.
 This resulte d in 13 hours of manu al labou r by 5 people .
 Claiming 13 hours of work complete d by 5 people
 Claiming cost of weed killer-$3 5
 Claiming cost of tip fees for the disposa l of weed s and waste material - $30
• Compe nsatio n for Breac h of Section 75 of the RTA:
 For furthe r details refer to items (h) and (i) of the Statutory Decla ration .
 The tenants were severely stresse d and traumatise d by the verbal abuse receive d by
Mr. Barton e the day he trespa sse d. Tenants feare d for their safety while at the
premise s and neve r felt at home.
Compensation for Breac h of Section 91(c) and 91(d) of the RTA
 For furthe r details refer to item (j) of the Statuto ry Decla ra tio n.
 Tenants were blackm ailed into staying on until new tenants were found to ensure we
would be given all bond money back.
 Claiming rent paid from the notice to vacate date provid ed in a letter dated on the
12th June 2007 to the property manag er. This is the period betwe en 27th June 2007 to
10th July 2007, a total of 2 weeks rent = $1070
 Comp en satio n for reloc ation costs resulting from being force d to leave the tenanc y early
tLIIAustLIJ Aus  Time taken off work to find alternative accom m o dation and move house -1 day for
each tenant
 Claiming remov alist fee's $470
Time taken to be availa ble and prepa re for court hearin g
 Claim 2 working days for each tenant
Unpaid bond money
 Claimin g $477.89
9. On 31 July 2008 the lessor appeared by phone and the tenants both appeared in
person.
10. The tenants accepted responsibility for the water account of $27.09 and said that
had since paid that sum to the lessor. The tenants gave evidence that they did in
fact carry out some weeding in the back yard as described in the statutory
declaration.
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLI AustLi
11. The lessor’s managing real estate agent, Mr Nancarrow, gave evidence by phone.
He admitted that he informed the tenants that:
(a) the lessor intended to carry out landscaping during the tenancy which
never occurred
(b) the lessor promised to erect a pergola during the tenancy which did not
occur
(c) the urgent repairs to the dishwasher were notified to the lessor but the
repairs were not done
(d) the problem with the letter box was notified to the lessor but not fixed
12. The lessor admitted that he entered the back yard of the premises on 8 June 2008
without the permission of the tenants. He said he was there to inspect the work of
ACTEWAGL on the sewer lines. The lessor said he thought Mr Nancarrow had
arranged for him to access to the back yard. Mr Nancarrow described this as being
“new to me”. The lessor denied that he had regularly parked on the road outside
AustLII AustLI
the premises to watch the premises. He said he had occasionally done so when
visiting the premises.
13. The lessor said that he had a phone line installed to the premises and it was a
matter for the tenants to pay for the connection of the phone to the network if they
wanted a phone. At no stage did he promises to supply a phone.
14. There was no evidence from either party concerning the cause of the death of the
plants in question other than the existence of the drought and the fact the plants
were newly planted.
15. The Tribunal accepted the evidence of the tenants and Mr Nancarrow and to the
extent that this evidence conflicted with that of the lessor, the Tribunal preferred
the evidence of the tenants and Mr Nancarrow.
16. After hearing the evidence the Tribunal gave the decision recorded above. On that
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! occasion the Tribunal announced its finding of fact that:
(a) The lessors attendance at the premises uninvited constituted a breach of
the tenants’ right to quiet enjoyment (prescribed term 52) which caused the
female tenant considerable consternation:
(b) The lessors failure to provide the promises pergola and landscaping both
constituted a breach of prescribed term 54(1)(c) of the Act in that a non-
existed pergola and non-existent landscaping do not constitute a pergola
and landscaping in a reasonable state of repair;
(c) The lessor’s failure to repair the dishwasher was a breach of prescribed
term 55 of the Act
(d) The tenants had undertaken weeding as they described.
(e) The failure of the lessor to pay for the tennants’ connection to the phone
network was not a breach on the lessor’s part.
(f) The act of the lessor parking on the road outside the house was not a
breach of quiet enjoyment on the lessor’s part.
(g) The above breaches by the lessor justified the tenants in serving notice to
terminate the tenancy. Accordingly no rent was due after 10 July 2007.
(h) There was no evidence to account for why the plants died. They may have Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
died due to the drought or simply because the natural attrition rate for new
planted plants. In any event it was the lessor to show that the plants died
due to the tenants failure to water them and there was simply no evidence
to support this assertion.
17. On 15 August the tenants advised the Tribunal that they wished to withdraw their
counter claim.
18. The lessors have subsequently sought reasons for the Tribunal’s decision of 31
July 2008.
A. Anforth
26th September 2008