AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
CITATION: MC CAULEY V MC INNES [2008] ACTRTT (11)
RT 325 of 2008
Catchwords: Tenant, equitable interest in premises, party leasing to her self,
constructive trust, oral trust for interest in land.
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust Tribunal: A. Anforth, Member
Date: 21 August 2008
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL ) NO: RT 325 of 2008
JACQUELINE ELIZABETH McCAULEY
(Applicant)
AND:
ANTHONY BLAIR McINNES
(Respondent/Landlord)
DECISION
Tribunal :A. Anforth, Member
Date +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! :26 June 2008
Decision :21st August 2008
1. The Applicant is a tenant of the premises under a residential tenancy
agreement.
2. The Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and determine the Respondent’s
application for possession.
3. The Applicant has leave to file any claims within 14 days made in her capacity
as a tenant against the Respondent in his capacity as landlord.
4. The matter is to be listed for further directions on date to be fixed by the
Registrar.
5. The issue of costs is reserved for submissions.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
…………………………….
Member
21stAugust2008
istLI AustLII AustLI
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL ) NO: RT 325 of 2008
JACQUELINE ELIZABETH McCAULEY
(Applicant/Landlord)
AND
ANTHONY BLAIR McINNES
(Respondent)
REASONS FOR DECISION
Background
1. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! In June of 2000 the parties were friends and the Applicant was already living in
the premises in question from which she conducted a book distribution business.
Either the Applicant approached the Respondent, or the Respondent approached
the Applicant, with the proposition that the premises be purchased and that the
Applicant remain in possession after the purchase. On the Applicant’s version the
Respondent approached her with a proposition that he assist her to purchase the
premises by advancing the necessary capital for the deposit and raising the
mortgage in his name; she was to make the mortgage payments on a periodic basis
and carry out repairs and renovations in lieu of her contribution to the deposit.
After 5 years she was to have the option of continuing the arrangement; buying
the Respondent’s interest in the house for $20,000; or calling for the sale of the
premises with an apportionment of the capital gain according to some undefined
formula.
2. On the Respondent’s version of the agreement the Applicant approached him. He
was to purchase the property as an investment. He was to supplied the deposit of
$10,000 and raised the mortgage solely in his name. The Applicant was to be
allowed to remain in situ as a tenant paying an agreed rent of $225pw; save that Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
the tenant was only to actually pay $185.0 per week ($800 pm) which was
calculated in an approximate way by reference to the Respondent’s mortgage
payments . The rent of $800 pm was said to be below market rent on the
understanding that the Applicant applied the residue of the rent ($225-$185=$40
pw) towards repairs and maintenance. The Respondent denies any agreement for
the Applicant to carry out repairs and renovations costing more than the residue or
rent beyond, and understood that that he alone was to be responsible for any
authorised renovations or alterations to the premises costing more than the residue
of the rent.
3. The Applicant essentially made the periodic payments sufficient to meet the
mortgage commitment. She carried out substantial alternations to the premises,
some with the Respondent’s consent and some without his consent. She has been
re-imbursed for some of these costs but not others.
4. The Applicant’s claim that she is more than a tenant of the Respondent, and is in
fact a joint owner of the equitable title in the house in which she lives. There is no
dispute that the Respondent is the sole registered proprietor of the premises.
5. The Respondent for his part asserts that the Applicant is nothing more than a
tenant and seeks an order for possession of the premises.
6. By agreement between the parties this decision is directed only to the issue of the
status of the Applicant and in particular whether she is, or is not, a tenant of the
Respondent. The jurisdiction of the Tribunal is only enliven in the former case. It
was agreed that should the Tribunal find that the Applicant is a tenant of the
Respondent then the issue of the Respondent’s application for possession would
be dealt with in later separate proceedings.
The history of the application:
7. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! The Applicant’s application was filed in the Tribunal on 18 April 2008. The
application was prompted by the service upon the Applicant of a Notice of Vacate
by the Respondent seeking possession by 21 April 2008.
8. The Notice to Vacate alleged:
(a) The Applicant had caused damage to the premises via a fire in the kitchen
(b) The Applicant failed to notify the Respondent of the fire damage
(c) The Applicant made unauthorised additions, alterations and painting to the
premises without the Respondent’s consent
(d) The Applicant threatened to strip the premises prior to ceasing to reside in
the premises
9. The Respondent later abandoned grounds (a) and (b) above.
10. The Notice to Vacate had not been preceded by any Notice to Remedy. The
Notice to Vacate asserted that a Notice to Remedy was not required by reason of
prescribed term 93(d) Residential Tenancies Act 1997 (the Act). Paragraph 3 of
the Notice to Vacate stated: Must!Il AustLI! AustLI AustLi
In accordance with section 93(d) of the Residential Tenancies Act 1997 as there have been in
excess of three breaches to the standard tenancy terms, the lessor is not required to provide
you with two weeks to remedy the breaches and may issue this notice to vacate.
11. Prescribed term 93 provides:
93 The tribunal may order the termination of the tenancy and eviction of the tenant on the
ground of breach of the tenancy agreement in the following circumstances:
(a) the lessormust serve a written notice requiring the tenant within 2 weeks after the day of -
service to remedy the breach if it is capable of remedy;
(b) if the breach is not remedied within 2 weeks after the day of service or if the breach is not
capable of remedy—the lessor must give a notice to vacate the premises within 2 weeks after
the date of service of the notice to vacate;
(c) if the tenant does not vacate the premises within the period of 2 weeks after the date of
service of a notice to vacate—the lessor may apply to the tribunal for an order terminating the
tenancy and for the eviction of the tenant;
(d) if the tenant breaches the terms of the tenancy on 3 occasions on any ground—on the 3rd
- occasion the lessormay serve a notice to vacate and need not give the tenant 2 weeks to
remedy the breach.
12. In terms of prescribed term 93(d) it is not at all clear which breaches are the
preceding two breaches the Respondent relies upon in order to justify serving the
Notice to Vacate on the tenant for a third breach without the need to first serve a
Notice to Remedy. Ultimately there was no evidence from the Respondent of any
breaches other than those pertaining to grounds (c) and (d) of paragraph 8 above.
13. The issue of whether the Notice to Vacate is valid is an issue for another day. For
present purposes its relevance is confined to its role in invoking the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction.
14. The matter was listed before the Tribunal on 23 May 2008 for directions only.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi 15. On 19 May 2008 the Respondent’s solicitors filed an affidavit in the Tribunal. In
that affidavit the Respondent alleged that the Applicant had initially approached
him for a loan for the deposit to buy the premises. The Respondent proposed that
instead of making a loan he would advance a similar sum as the deposit, raise a
mortgage and purchase the premises with the Applicant as his tenant. The
Respondent said that it was agreed with the Applicant that she would pay $225 per
week over 5 years. The Respondent then authorised the Applicant to act as his
agent for the purchase. The premises were purchased for $111,500 on 2 June 2002
solely in the Respondent’s name.
16. The Respondent alleged that agreement was reached between the parties that the
Applicant would in fact pay only $800 per month or $185 per week and could
keep the residue of the rent ($225-$185=$40.00pw) to use doing repairs to the
premises. The Respondent alleged that he specifically informed the Applicant that
he was to approve any repairs or renovations and would pay for any cost beyond
the residue of rent retained by the Applicant for this purpose.
17. The Respondent alleged that he had his solicitors draw up a deed to embody the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
agreement, a copy of which was annexed to the affidavit. The Respondent said
that his solicitors sent the deed to the Applicant. The deed recites that the
Respondent is the owner of the premises and the Applicant is the tenant. It recites
that the Applicant was desirous of doing improvement to the premises with the
view to obtaining the benefit of the capital improvements on resale.
18. The deed was never executed by the Applicant who has her own story to tell about
it.
19. The deed itself recites that the Applicant is to apply the residue of the rent not
paid, calculated above to be $40 pw, to the “capital improvements” from which
she was to obtain some benefit on resale. It does not expressly provide for the
Applicant to expend any further sums of her own money on capital improvement.
But the deed then states that upon resale:
…that the monies expended by Jackie, to the extent that the same are above twenty thousand
dollars ($20,000) shall be divided equally between Jackie and Tony…
20. The terms of the deed are difficult to understand for two reasons. Firstly, even if
the Applicant expended the residual rent of $40pw over the 5 years of the
agreement it comes only to $10,400.00 and not $20,000. Therefore on the
assumption that the Applicant was only authorised to spend the residue of the rent
the Applicant would not be entitled to return on her investment in the capital
improvements on the sale in 5 years hence.
21. Secondly, the deed only offers to reimburse to the Applicant half of the value of
the capital improvements made by her over the sum of $20,000, and then it is
unclear whether the first $10,400 from the residue of the rent is to be included in
the $20,000. The deed does not offer the Applicant any benefit from any capital
gain associated with the capital improvements or movements in the market prices.
Thus on the face of the deed the Respondent is to obtain the benefit of the first
$20,000 improvements made by the Applicant and then 50% of the value of sums
expended by the Applicant over and above the $20,000 threshold. The Respondent
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! is to obtain this benefit whilst receiving all of the rent on a periodic basis save for
the small residue of $40pw and the Respondent is to obtain the whole of the
capital gains on resale. It is not difficult to see why the Applicant found the deed
to be offensive.
22. An arrangement of this kind makes little sense to the Tribunal in the context of a
tenancy. In fact section 15(3) of the Act has the effect of converting any payments
by the tenant for capital improvements, into rent. If it is assumed for the purposes
of the deed that the Applicant did in fact expend $20,000 in capital improvements
over 5 years then she is to be credited with the weekly equivalent of $77 as
addition rent paid. Allowing for the $40pw rent residue retained by the Applicant,
then the deed arrangement is equivalent to a rent increase of $37pw for each week
of the 5 years over and above the rent actually paid. The issue then arises whether
such a rent increase is lawful under the Act, but again this is a matter for another
day.
23. In the affidavit the Respondent alleged that renovations to the kitchen were carried
out in mid 2003 at a cost of $15,806 and that he paid the whole of the cost. The Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
next major improvement occurred in 2005 when the Applicant remodelled the
bathroom without the Respondent’s consent. The Respondent alleged that the
Applicant informed him at the time that she would render an account to him for
the bathroom renovations, being the difference between actual cost to her and the
tax deduction she could obtain in relation to it. The tax deduction stemmed from
the Applicant’s treatment of these costs as the costs incurred in remodelling her
business premises.
24. The next renovation recited in the affidavit occurred to front door in 2006. The
Applicant allegedly replaced the existing door and door jam with a custom made
door and security door. The Respondent denied that he consented to the
renovation.
25. At some point in time a fence dividing the premises from the neighbouring
premises required replacing. The Applicant paid for the fence. The Respondent
said that he expected that the cost of the fence would come from the $40pw
residue of the rent. The Tribunal notes in passing that the sum of $40pw would not
go far towards a new fence, new doors etc.
26. In December 2006 the Respondent said he consented to the Applicant’s arranging
to have the outside of the house painted. He said he gave instructions to use a
painter by the name of Steve Hillier who was indebted to the Respondent and
could work off the debt via the painting. The Applicant later said she was unaware
of any quid pro quo arrangements between the Respondent and Mr Hillier and that
she paid Mr Hillier the full amount of his account for which she has not been
reimbursed.
27. The Respondent asserted that in 2007 the Applicant retiled the outdoor stairs and
landings without his consent. In October 2007 the Applicant allegedly made
similar renovations to the laundry door without the Respondent’s consent.
28. The Respondent noted that in May or June 2007 the Applicant had undertaken the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! reduction in the floor level of the kitchen via grinding down the floor. The
Respondent said he had expressly forbidden the Applicant from doing this when
previously asked for permission by the Applicant. The Applicant has not
presented any invoices to the Respondent for the cost of the work. The Applicant
latter said that no grinding had taken place and that all that had occurred was the
replacement of the old floor boards with new ones.
29. The Respondent said that on 6 November 2007 the Applicant and he met for
dinner at the China Tea House, Erindale. The Respondent attempted to raise the
cost of the various renovations the Applicant had undertaken and the cost to
himself. The Respondent said that the Applicant was unwilling to enter the
discussion. The next day the Respondent put the invoices for the renovations in
her mailbox. The Applicant places this event on the evening of 15 November
2007.
30. On 16 November 2007 the Respondent wrote to the Applicant outlining the costs
incurred in the renovations and proposing a rent increase. Following some
correspondence it was agreed that the rent be increased to $1,000 per month or Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
$230 pw. If the Applicant is found to be a tenant then the issue will arise as to
whether this rent increase was lawful under the Act.
31. In further correspondence in November 2007 the Respondent sought and the
Applicant provided, further invoices for renovations. The Respondent says that he
requested explanations of the relevance of each invoice by letter of 27 November
2007 to which there has been no reply, accordingly he has not re-imbursed the
Applicant for these costs.
32. The Respondent contends that he has not been allowed access to the premises
since 5 December 2007 as a consequence of the present dispute.
33. The Respondent alleges that since late November 2007 he has been the subject of
a large volume of abusive correspondence from the Applicant including threats to
the safety of his daughter and threats to engage in public defamation of himself, as
a result of which he decided only to deal with the Applicant through his solicitors.
34. On 21 May 2008 the Applicant file a large volume of correspondence with the
Tribunal under cover of a letter of 19 May 2008. In that covering letter the
Applicant:
(a) denied ever asking the Respondent for a loan for the deposit. She said that
the initiative for the Respondent to assist her to purchase the premises
came entirely from the Respondent.
(b) said the deed did not reflect her understanding of the agreement and so she
deliberately refused to sign it.
(c) said the Respondent insisted that he pay the rates on the premises
(d) said all periodic “rent” payments were made direct to the Respondent’s
mortgage account.
(e) said the invoices for the repairs and renovations were not initially provided
to the Respondent because the Applicant understood that she was
responsible for those costs. It was only after the Respondent demanded
them in November 2008 that she provided copies. She denied that she was
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! fully reimbursed for the kitchen renovation, there being a residual $800
outstanding.
(f) denied that she did not consult the Respondent in relation to the
renovations to the bathroom, the front door or the laundry door.
(g) denied that she ground down the kitchen floor. She said that the old floor
boards were removed and replaced with new ones.
(h) said she paid Mr Steve Hillier, the painter appointed by the Respondent.
She denies ever being told of any debt owed by Mr Hillier to the
Respondent and received no credit from Mr Hillier for any such debt.
(i) denied engaging in any abuse towards the Respondent or his daughter and
alleged that the converse was the case.
35. From the volume of correspondence annexed to the covering letter it appears that
through out November-December 2007 and in February 2008 the Applicant was
busy on a daily basis writing one or more letters to the Respondent’s solicitor and
other people. By way of example only, between 7 December and 31 December
2007 the Applicant wrote 47 letters to the Respondent’s solicitors. The Applicant
appears to have had a rest in January 2008. In February 2008 she wrote 14 letters Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
to the Respondent’s solicitors and in the first 3 weeks of March 2008 she wrote 9
more letter to the Respondent’s solicitors.
36. Most of this volume of correspondence deals with a range of historical and
emotional issues which have no bearing on the issue before the Tribunal. The
sheer volume and intensity of the Applicant’s emotional out pouring in these
letters makes it difficult to sift the “chaff from the wheat” in terms of relevance.
One particularly disturbing repetitive theme in the Applicant’s correspondence is
her determination to inflict financial harm on the Respondent, to obtain damages
against him for her suffering, to publicly humiliate the Respondent and to cause
him to expend legal costs in his defence. In her letter of 12 December 2007 she
encapsulates her position in saying “I have to do everything I can to stop him”..
37. The following notations of correspondence are selective only and do not purport
to represent the full volume. There is no notation of the content of correspondence
beyond 12 December 2007 because that correspondence becomes increasing
emotional, threatening and irrelevant to the Tribunal’s deliberations:
18 Nov 07 A letter from the Applicant to the Respondent offering to re-
imburse all taxes and costs paid by the Respondent to date;
22 Nov 07 A letter from the Respondent to the Applicant outlining his
investment strategy for the house and his expectations of making a capital
gain. The Respondent said “maintenance would be your responsibility since
you could claim it on tax against your business”. He said he appreciated the
refurbishment to the kitchen but expressed the view that there had been
overcapitalisation of the premises through the renovations.
Undated Letter from the Applicant to the Respondent in which she re-
iterates that she accepts responsibility for all renovation costs and is not asking
for any refund. In that letter the Applicant says “consider the renovations as
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! just changes made by the tenant. It happens with business rentals all the time.
Its just an upgrade at no cost to you…you’ve been lucky to have me take care
of this place. You can have it back anytime you want.”
Undated Letter from the Applicant to the Respondent in which she expresses
her intention to move from the premises. In that letter she says “I’d rather pay
market rent and deal with an agent or a standard landlord. I’ve had an offer to
do a cheap rent/renovation deal for someone else which I may pursue. I’ll be
fine and you’ll be free.”
Undated Letter from the Applicant to the Respondent acknowledging the
Notice to Vacate and asking for an extension to 60 days to vacate. The
Respondent reply by letter of 26 November 2007 telling the Applicant she
could take as much time as she wished to move.
25 Nov 07 Letter from the Applicant to the Respondent explaining the various
renovations and how she had borne the costs of something in the order of $40-
50K plus labour. At the end of the letter the Applicant wrote “I’m ready to Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
vacate at any time…Your house, your choice. I have never expected anything
out of this arrangement other than a place to live for some unknown period of
time. I can happily and easily walk away leaving you with your house and our
friendship undamaged.”
Undated Letter from the Applicant to the Respondent in which she says that
she will move in January 2008. The Applicant wrote “I have been telling you
for years that I had no intention of trying to force you to honour our
agreement. It would have been so much quicker, easier and less damaging if
your had just asked me to leave.”
2 Dec 07 Letter from the Respondent to the Applicant in which he states that
he will make full restitution for all renovation and repairs costs from this point
in time onwards.
Undated Letter from the Applicant to the Respondent denying that she ever
asked for restitution and accusing the Respondent of forgetting the nature of
the original agreement.
4 Dec 07 Letter from the Applicant to the Respondent again alleging that the
Respondent has forgotten or chosen to ignore the original agreement. The
letter does not set out the terms of the original agreement.
Undated Letter from the Applicant to the Respondent asserting her right to a
share of the ownership of the premises based on the respective total inputs in
capital and labour.
5 Dec 07 Letter from the Applicant to the Respondent in which she asserted
her right as a co-owner and declared that she did not intend to vacate the
premises.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! 6 Dec 07 Letter from the Applicant to Mr Stephen Read in which she speaks
of her determination to obtain to obtain justice. She says “I intend to get my
house and compensation. I worked for it, I suffered for it and I deserve it.”
8 Dec 07 Letter from the Applicant to the Respondent’s solicitors in which
she again asserted that the original agreement involved the house being hers,
which would be sold and the capital gain apportioned after 5 years.
12 Dec 07 Letter from the Applicant to the Respondent’s solicitors in which
she openly declares her intention to inflict harm on the Respondent by running
up his legal costs with his solicitors
38. On 21 May 2007 the Respondent filed a cross claim seeking an order for
possession pursuant to section 51 of the Act. The application annexed a copy of
the title search for the premises showing the Respondent as the sole registered
proprietor; repeated the allegations contained in the earlier Notice to Vacate at
paragraph 8 above; refers to threats allegedly made by the Applicant in various
specified correspondence; and repeats the Applicant’s declared intention not to Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
vacate the premises.
39. The matter came before the Tribunal on 23 May 2008. Procedural orders were
made for the filing of outstanding witness statements and the issue of summons to
witnesses who were said by the Applicant to be relevant but hostile to her. Orders
were made for identification of witnesses intended to be called and whether each
witness was required for cross examination.
40. In response to these orders the Applicant filed a request with supporting reasons
for a summons to; Meyer Vandenberg Lawyers, to produce their file relating to
the drawing of the original deed for the Respondent; Mr Read; Mr Hillier; and Mr
Berand. In addition the Applicant filed witness statements from Elana McCauley,
Colin Jones and Stephen Read and lodged a letter dated 7 June 2008 asserting that
she was unclear as the scope of the matter to be determined by the Tribunal.
41. The statement by Elana McCauley stated that she had a conversation with the
Respondent at a wedding in 2004 in which the Respondent said “that he hoped my
mother would be able to own the premises free and clear, because he cared about
her and wanted her to have some equity and own her own home”. The statements
from Mr Jones and Mr Read appear to have no direct relevance to any thing to be
determined by the Tribunal at this point in time.
42. By letter of 6 June 2008 the Respondent raised objections with the Registrar
concerning the issue of summons to Mr Read, Mr Hillier, Mr Berand and Meyer
Vandenberg. In response to these objections, and the Applicant’s letter of 7 June
2008, the matter was listed for urgent directions on 12 June 2008.
43. After hearing the parties on 12 June 2008 the Tribunal authorised the issue of the
various summons.
44. On 16 June 2008 the Applicant lodged, unsolicited, with the Tribunal copies of
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! correspondence between herself and the Respondent’s solicitors. The tenor of the
correspondence was essential one of treats and posturing by the Applicant which
did not add anything of evidential value.
45. On 16 June 2008 the Respondent’s solicitors filed with the Tribunal, unsolicited,
an amended Notice to Vacate in the same terms as previously save that the
reference to the fire damage to the kitchen was deleted. The Respondent also
sought a summons to issue to the Applicant to produce her various tax records
relating to her business.
46. On 17 June 2008 the Applicant again filed with the Tribunal, unsolicited,
correspondence from herself to the Respondent containing a range of allegations
of improper conduct and other matters of little evidential value.
47. On 18 June 2008 the Applicant requested the Tribunal to issue a summons to the
Respondent for his tax and financial records together with an explanation of the
reasons for her request, namely that the manner in which the Respondent
characterised the rent payments in his tax return may throw light on his true Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
understanding of the nature of the payment. The Respondent subsequently
objected to the issue of this summons.
48. The Applicant also wrote to the Registrar making allegations against a particular
witness accusing her of “unstable mental history” and that the Respondent had
mislead the Tribunal concerning the availability of another witness.
49. On 18 June 2008 the Respondent filed a witness statement from Edward Barend
and the Applicant filed a witness statement from Tom Casson.
50. Mr Barend stated that he was the business manager for the Respondent at the time
of the purchase of the premises in question in 2000 until December 2007. His
statement essentially corroborated the Respondent’s version of events but only in
so far as Mr Barend was relaying that which the Respondent had told him
concerning the issue over the years. Mr Barend had no first hand experience of the
venture or of the Applicant’s involvement.
51. Mr Casson was a tradesman who did some of the renovations for the Applicant.
His statement was not relevant to the present issue before the Tribunal.
52. On 19 June 2008 the Respondent filed a witness statement from Thersa Gifford.
Ms Gifford was an employee of the Applicant from 1999-2006. She said that she
had never heard the Applicant make any assertion of ownership of the premises.
From her conversations over the years with the Applicant and Respondent her
understanding of the arrangement was consistent with the Respondent’s version.
She said she saw no examples of hostility from the Respondent to the Applicant.
53. On 19 June 2008 the Respondent also complained to the Tribunal of the costs
being incurred by the Respondent in dealing with the Applicant’s voluminous
correspondence and the Applicant’s allegedly defamatory statements to a range of
people known to both parties.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! 54. On 19 June 2008 the Respondent filed an affidavit. In that affidavit the
Respondent:
(a) denied the allegation by the Applicant that she in fact paid any of the
$10,000 deposit;
(b) provided evidence that he paid the rates and taxes on the land including the
excess water;
(c) noted that a standard residential tenancy agreement was annexed to the
deed in 2000 that the Applicant refused to sign;
(d) pointed out that there had not been a rent increase from the beginning of
the arrangement in 2000 until later in 2007 but the mortgage had risen
steadily in this period. This fact was said to be inconsistent with the
Applicant’s assertion that her rent payments were in fact mortgage
payments.
(e) alleged that he had never heard the Applicant assert a right of co-
ownership until December 2007;
(f) annexed a letter from the Applicant dated 12 October 2006 in which the
Applicant said “I’m in no position to buy the house from you and I cant Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
continue to rent a space where I’m considered irresponsible if I let dirt
come into contact with the treated pine.”
(g) stated that he has declared to the ATO all rent payments received from the
Applicant as rental income;
(h) denied the statement attributed to him in the witness statement of Elana
McCauley;
55. The matter was listed for urgent further directions before the Tribunal on 20 June
2008. The Applicant appeared in person and Ms Moore, solicitor appeared for the
Respondent. The Tribunal heard argument concerning the proposed issue of the
summon to the Respondent to produce his tax and financial records and ordered
production. Orders were made for access by the parties to the Applicant’s
financial and the file of Meyer Vandenberg, both of which had been produced
under summons. The Tribunal explained again to the Applicant the scope of the
matter before the Tribunal and the process to be followed in preparing for the
hearing and at the hearing.
56. On 24 June 2008 the Applicant notified the Tribunal that she did not require Mr
Hillier to attend for cross examination.
57. On 24 June 2008 the Respondent filed an affidavit from his accountant annexing
the Respondent’s tax returns for the financial years 30 June 2002 to 30 June 2007.
Those returns show the declared gross rental income as follows:
2006/2007 $6400
2005/2006 $6400
2004/2005 $9600
2003/2004 $9600
2002/2003 $9600
On the Respondent’s evidence he was receiving $800 pm from the Applicant for
rent which is $9600 pa. This accords with the 2002/2003-2004/2005 financial
years but it is not consistent with declared gross rental income in 2005/2006-
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! 2006/2007. The documents appended to the tax returns for the latter years suggest
a short fall in rent by the Applicant as the explanation.
58. On 25 June 2008 the Respondent filed submissions on the law.
59. The matter was head on 26 June 2008. The Applicant appeared in person and Mr
Kay, solicitor, appeared for the Respondent.
60. The Applicant gave evidence and was subjected to cross examination. In her
evidence in chief the Applicant said that the arrangement with the Respondent was
for her to pay the mortgage and the renovation costs. At the end of 5 years she was
to have the option of:
(a) continuing with the present arrangement
(b) buying out the Respondents share of the premises for $20,000
(c) selling the property and apportioning the profits.
61. She said the agreement was that she was to expend $20,000 in renovations over
the 5 years to match the Respondent’s initial investment of the deposit of $10,000. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
The Respondent and the Applicant were to each take half the capital gain on any
sale.
62. The Applicant maintained that the dinner at Erindale China Tea House occurred
on 15 November 2007 at which time she offered to buy out the Respondent’s
interest in the house.
63. The Tribunal put to the Applicant some of the statements in her correspondence
from paragraph 37 above. In particular the Tribunal put to the Applicant the
content of her letter of 27 November 2007 which was written after the dinner at
the China Tea house, in which the Applicant said:
“I have no interest in imposing any limits on your overall investment strategy. In fact even at
our business dinner I told you that I appreciate the time you’ve given me in your house and
that I’m ready to vacate at any time …I have no intention of being in a position where I can be
seen to be stopping you from making, or forcing you to make , any particular decision. Your
house, your choice. I have never expected anything out of this arrangement other than a place
to live for some unknown period of time. I can happily walk away leaving you with your
house…”
64. The issues that immediately arise out of this passage are:
(a) The statement that the Applicant has no interest in imposing any limits on
the Respondent’s investment strategy is inconsistent with her testimony that
she had the three options at the end of 5 years. The fact of having these options
is itself a limit on the Respondent’s investment autonomy:
(b) The Applicant says that at the dinner at the China Tea House she thanked
the Respondent for the time he had given her in his house. This is not
consistent with the Applicant’s oral testimony that she purported to exercise
her option to buy him out at that dinner:
(c) The Applicant says that she is ready to vacate at any time, which is
inconsistent with her later actions and with her assertion of co-ownership;
(d) The Applicant says “your house, your choice” which is again not
consistent with the later assertion of co-ownership
(e) +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! The Applicant says that she has never expected anything from the
“arrangement” other than “a place to live for some unknown period” which is
entirely inconsistent with her later assertion of co-ownership.
65. The Applicant was unable to offer any explanation for this apparent change in the
tenor of correspondence after 4 December 2007 save to say that her apparent
admissions to being a mere tenant prior to this date were a consequence of her
intimidation at the hands of the Respondent. The Tribunal asked the Applicant on
several occasions to explain what acts of intimidation by the Respondent she was
referring to and how these acts of intimidation caused to write these apparently
untrue statements about her status in the house. The Applicant was either unable
or unwilling to provide any meaningful response to these questions from the
Tribunal.
66. In cross examination the Applicant admitted that in her tax returns she had
claimed the payments made to the Respondent as business “rent” and not as a
mortgage payment for a capital purchase.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
67. Mr Stephen Read gave evidence and was subject to cross examination. His
evidence did not touch on the matters relevant to the Tribunal.
68. The Applicant did not call any other witnesses. She further indicated that she did
not require Mr Barend or Ms Gifford for cross examination. The Applicant had
not previously advised the Respondent of this fact and both these witnesses were
on standby to give their evidence.
69. The Respondent gave evidence and was subject to cross examination. His oral
evidence did not add anything additional to his affidavit.
70. At the conclusion of the hearing both parties were invited to file and serve any
submissions on the evidence and/or the law. The Applicant was to file hers by 30
June 2008; the Respondent by 7 July 2008; and the Applicant’s submissions in
reply were due by 11 July 2008.
71. On 30 June 2008 the Applicant filed her submissions. Apart from re-iterating her
version of the agreement, the Applicant drew attention to:
(a) the lack of logic inherent in the unsigned deed concerning the proposal to
refund to the Applicant 50% of her capital expenditure over the threshold
of $20,000.
(b) the implausibility that a mere tenant would take on the responsibility for
repairs and improvements;
(c) the failure of the unsigned deed to deal with the issue of the apportionment
of the capital gain;
72. In a separate submission of the same date the Applicant offered an explanation of
the manner in which the Respondent intimidated and abused her such as to cause
her write the apparent admissions contained in the various pieces of her
correspondence that had been put to her during the hearing. She said that she was
initially adopting a path of least resistance and was prepared to write or say
anything that would keep the Respondent happy. This attitude apparently changed
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! after the dinner on 15 November 2007 on which occasion she said that she told the
Respondent that she “wanted to buy him out”. The Tribunal notes in passing that:
(a) there is no correspondence in evidence dating back to 15 November 2007
in which the Applicant makes any claim of ownership. There is
correspondence after 15 November 2007 in which the Applicant appears to
conceded total ownership to the Respondent (eg the letter of 25 November
2007).The earliest identified claim to partial ownership by the Applicant
appears to be her correspondence of 4 December 2007.
(b) the letter of 25 November which described the events at the Tea House
made no reference to the Applicant having offered to buy out the
Respondent and the content of that letter is only consistent with her
admitting to a tenancy.
(c) prior to 4 December 2007 her offer to pay for renovations and rates/taxes
is consistent with a view by the Applicant of the arrangement as a
commercial lease for a business premises albeit she also lived on the
premises.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
73. On 6 July 2008 the Applicant advised the Tribunal in writing that she did not
propose to read any submissions from the Respondent nor file and serve any
submissions in reply. She invited the Tribunal to proceed to judgement.
74. On 9 July 2008 the Respondent file his submissions. The Respondent relied upon
the statements of Mr Barend and Ms Gifford who were not required for cross
examination. The Respondent objected to the admission into evidence of the
second letter from the Applicant of 30 June 2008 in which she offered an
explanation of why she felt intimidated by the Respondent. The Respondent
pointed out that the evidence was closed at the end of the hearing and that he had
not had the opportunity of testing by way of cross examination the Applicant’s
assertions contained in this letter. This submission is clearly correct and the
Tribunal puts no weight on the content of that second letter.
75. The Respondent pointed to:
(a) the various pieces of correspondence from the Applicant in which she
seemingly admitted to being only a tenant:
(b) the Respondent tax records which disclosed the rent payments as income;
(c) the range of threats by the Applicant in the correspondence principally
directed to the Respondent but not exclusively so.
(d) the fact that the Applicant exercised an exclusive right of occupancy of the
premises to the point of excluding the Respondent after 5 December 2007.
This is consistent with a tenancy but not consistent with co-ownership by
the parties.
76. The Respondent sought costs against the Applicant for the manner in she allegedly
delayed the proceedings, the cost of having witnesses on standby, and the
meritless nature of the Applicant’s case.
Findings of fact by the Tribunal:
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! 77. The Applicant was a tenant of the premises prior to the purchase of the premises
by the Respondent in 2000. She used the premises principally as her home but
also conducted her book business from her home and another premises,
78. Following the purchase by the Respondent the Applicant remained in possession
of the premises continued to use the premises principally as a home as well as
running part of her book business from the premises.
79. At all material times the Applicant exercised the exclusive right of possession of
the premise to the point of excluding the Respondent from access to the premises
except with her consent.
80. The Respondent is the registered proprietor of the premises and as such holds the
exclusive legal title to the premises (section 58 Land Titles Act 1925).
81. The real contest between the parties is the nature of the agreement reached
between the parties in 2000 that led to the purchase of the premises. The
competing contentions are set out above. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
82. In favour of the Applicant’s version of the agreements that she was a co-owner of
the equitable title, is the fact that:
(a) the deed was unsigned:
(b) for the reasons given at paragraphs 19-22 above the deed makes little sense
in the context of an alleged tenancy agreement:
(c) a mere tenant is not responsible for structural repairs and renovations
(prescribed terms 54-55 of the Act) such as the unsigned deed purported to
attribute to the Applicant:
(d) the Applicant’s rent was approximately equal to the periodic mortgage
repayments:
(e) the Applicant did in fact pay for much of the renovations, at least until the
dispute arose in later November 2007 at which time the Respondent
belatedly made a conditional offer to pay some of those costs:
(f) no residential tenancy agreement was ever signed.
83. In favour of the Respondent’s version of the agreement that the Applicant was a
mere tenant, is the fact that:
(a) the Respondent advanced the whole of the capital sum for the deposit:
(b) the Respondent raised the mortgage;
(c) the contract of sale and certificate of title were solely in the Respondent’s
name;
(d) the Respondent in fact paid the government taxes and charges which are
costs that fall to the owner/landlord;
(e) the Respondent did have the deed drawn at the commencement of the
arrangement in 2000 with the residential tenancy agreement annexed,
albeit was never executed by the Applicant;
(f) the Respondent in fact reimbursed the Applicant for some, but not all, of
the renovations;
(g) the Respondent declared the periodic payments received from the
Applicant as “rent” to the Tax Commissioner;
(h) Mr Berand, the Respondent’s business manager over the whole of the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! relevant period corroborated the Respondent’s version.
(i) nothing in the file of Meyer Vandenberg was inconsistent with the
Respondent’s version.
84. Against the Applicant is the fact that:
(a) she declared the periodic payments as “rent” to the Tax Commissioner as
opposed to capital payments for the purchase of an asset:
(b) she did not assert any equitable title until 4 December 2007 after a dispute
had arisen with the Respondent:
(c) that Ms Gifford had no indication from the Applicant of the assertion of
her equitable interest until recently, when she had been in a position
relative to the Applicant to have heard a more contemporaneous assertion
of that right over the years:
(d) most importantly, the Applicant’s own correspondence until 4 December
2007 contained statements that were only consistent with her being a
tenant, whether residential or commercial;
(e) the Applicant’s correspondence after 4 December 2007 became increasing
bitter in nature and indicated an intention to make the Respondent pay, Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
both financially and in reputational terms.
(f) the Applicant’s various correspondence contain important issue of
inconsistency. In particular the Applicant asserted in oral evidence that she
sought to exercise her option of the right to buy out the Respondent’s
interest at the dinner at the China Tea House on 15 November 2007
whereas her correspondence in the two weeks after that date gave no
indication of this position and were only consistent with an admission of a
mere tenancy. This inconsistency is compounded by the open nature of the
threats made by the Applicant to inflict economic harm on the Respondent.
85. Against the Respondent is the fact that:
(a) the agreement propounded by the Respondent as a residential tenancy
agreement contains invalid terms imposing on the tenant the obligation for
repairs and renovations;
(b) the deed propounded by the Respondent makes little commercial or logical
sense and would have been most unfair to a mere tenant and in breach of
the Act.
86. Put at its highest for the Applicant there may not have been a true meeting of
minds in 2000 such that her understanding of the nature of the agreement may not
have been the same as the Respondent’s. The pity is that the Applicant did not
press the matter after she received the deed to which she objected, which should
have alerted her to the fact that a difference of expectation existed concerning the
nature of the agreement. The deed was presented to her shortly after the purchase
in 2000 at which time she had not invested any capital or labour in the project. It
was open to the Applicant at that time to have demanded clarification of the
agreement or in default thereof to have moved to other premises. She had nothing
invested at that point in time. Unfortunately the Applicant did not do so and
continued with her perception of the “arrangement”.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! 87. Put at its lowest for the Applicant, she was aware that she was only a tenant. She
took the view that because the premises were used for her business that she was
akin to a commercial tenant who could claim various tax deductions for the
renovation of business premises and that she may recover some part of any
renovation costs on resale. This would explain why the Applicant was prepared to
accept responsibility for renovations in return for a rent reduction and the
avoidance of the disruption of moving premises.
88. Put at its highest for the Respondent, he was purchasing an investment property
with a guaranteed tenant in situ with whom he had entered a very favourable
agreement whereby he was relieved from the usual landlord obligations to
maintain and repair the premises. He stood to gain from the Applicant’s
investment of her labour and capital in carrying out the renovations to the extent
of the whole of the first $20,000 and then 50% of all renovations costs paid
thereafter by the Applicant.
89. Put at its lowest for the Respondent, he has taken unfair advantage of the
Applicant by allowing her to improve his property on a mistaken understanding of Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
the nature of the agreement and he may have committed various breaches of the
Act in his capacity as a landlord.
90. Having read all the correspondence and heard the parties in evidence, the Tribunal
finds as a fact that:
(a) the Respondent purchased the premises as an investment property in his
own right. The Respondent did not intend to permit the Applicant any
ownership in the property and intended only that the Applicant was a mere
tenant;
(b) the agreement between the parties was that the Applicant remain in
possession as a tenant; that she be responsible for repairs and renovations
and that she may recover some of her capital investment in the renovations
to the premises upon resale;
(c) there was no agreement between the parties whereby the Applicant was to
take any interest in the title to the premises, either immediately or after 5
years;
(d) the Applicant did not provide any of the capital costs for the purchase of
the premises and had no liability under the mortgage;
(e) there was a friendship but no personal relationship between the parties
such as would found a “presumption of advancement” at law;
(f) the Respondent entered an agreement with the Applicant in 2000 to escape
his duties at law as a landlord by offering a marginally reduced rent in
exchange for the Applicant forgoing her rights as a tenant to require the
landlord to provide and maintain the premises in a reasonable state of
repair;
(g) the Applicant did not view herself as anything other than the equivalent of
a commercial tenant until around 4 December 2007. This date was the first
time that the Applicant determined to assert a right to the title of the
premises.
(h) the period payments made by the Applicant, referred to as “rent” may have
been approximately equivalent to the Respondent’s mortgage payments,
but they were also within the range of the commercial rent as well. The
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Tribunal finds that the payments were in fact rent;
(i) the Respondent stood back and watched the Applicant carry out extensive
repairs going well beyond the value of the marginal rent reduction,
consistent with his understanding expressed in the deed that the Applicant
may expend in excess of $20,000 in renovations over 5 years. Whilst he
may have complained to the Applicant from time to time about the nature
and cost of the renovations he did not take any steps as a landlord to
prevent it; he was content for the Applicant to bear the costs of the
renovations and repairs until after she asserted an equitable interest in the
premises; and he fully intended to take the advantage of any capital gains
arising from the renovations;
Legal tests to be applied:
91. The Tribunal only has jurisdiction if either a “residential tenancy agreement”
exists or an “occupancy agreement” exists. The terms are defined in the Act as
follows:
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
6A(1) An agreement is a residential tenancy agreement if, underthe agreement—
(a) a person gives someone else (the tenant ) a right to occupy stated premises; and
(b) the premises are for the tenant to use as a home (whether or not together with other
people); and
(c) the right is given for value.
(2) The agreement may be—
(a) express or implied; or
(b) in writing, oral, or partly in writing and partly oral.
(3) The right to occupy may be—
(a) exclusive or not exclusive; and
(b) given with a right to use facilities, furniture or goods.
(4) This section is subject to the following sections:
section 6D (Certain kinds of agreements not residential tenancy agreements)
section 6E (Certain people given right of occupation not tenants)
section 6F (Certain kinds of premises mean no residential tenancy agreement).
th Austell AustLII AustLI
71C(1) An agreement is an occupancy agreement if—
(a) a person (the grantor ) gives someone else (the occupant ) a right to occupy stated
premises; and
(b) the premises are for the occupant to use as a home (whether or not with other people); and
(c) the right is given for value; and
(d) the agreement is not a residential tenancy agreement.
(2) The agreement may be—
(a) express or implied; or
(b) in writing, oral, or partly in writing and partly oral.
Note After 6 weeks, the occupancy agreement should be in writing (see s 71E (c)).
(3) The right to occupy may be—
(a) exclusive or not;
(b) given with a right to use facilities, furniture or goods.
(4) The person given the right to occupy the premises may be—
(a) a boarder or lodger; or
(b) someone prescribed by regulation for this section.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Note This Act does not apply to retirement villages, nursing homes, hostels for aged or
disabled people or other prescribed premises (see s 4).
92. As the holder of legal title the Respondent is the person with the right to
possession. If the Applicant has no equitable claim to any part of the property then
her right to be on, and remain upon, the property asserting an exclusive right of
possession against the owner can only arise from a statutory tenancy (residential
tenancy agreement under the Act), a tenancy at common law or a contractual
license.
93. If it be assumed that the Applicant has no equitable title to assert, then on the
findings of fact above the Applicant would answer the description of a tenant
under a residential tenancy agreement per each of the criteria in section 6A. The
fact that the tenancy agreement was not reduced to writing does not negate the
existence of such an agreement (s6A(2)(b)).
94. The test of whether a tenancy agreement exists is to be judged objectively from
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
the nature of the rights conferred and exercised, as opposed to the subjective
intention of the parties (Radaich v Smith (1959) 101 CLR 209; Bruton v London
Quadrant Housing Trust 1999 3 AER 481 (HL)). At common law the key indicia
of a tenancy is the exclusive right to possession (Radaich v Smith) although this
indicia is expressly excluded from the definition of a “residential tenancy
agreement”. In the present case the Applicant was given, and in fact exercised an
exclusive right of possession.
95. The fact that the Respondent has purported to impose conditions on the agreement
inconsistent with a residential tenancy agreement under the Act (relating to repairs
and renovations cf section 15(3) and prescribed terms 54-55) does not of itself
take the agreement outside the scope of a residential tenancy agreement; it simply
means that the inconsistent terms are void and that monies paid under the void
term may be recoverable by Applicant (sections 8-9 of the Act).
96. By even if for some reasons not apparent to the Tribunal the present agreement is
not a residential tenancy (other than the possible existence of an equitable interest
by the Applicant in the title), the agreement must answer the generality of the
definition of an “occupancy agreement”.
97. Thus the Tribunal concludes that, putting to one side the issue of the Applicant’s
claimed equitable title to the house, that she is a tenant under a residential tenancy
agreement which is sufficient to invoke the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
98. The real issue is whether the Applicant can establish her claim to an equitable
interest in the premises. Should she succeed with that proposition then she may
not be a tenant, either under a residential tenancy agreement or at common law,
for the simple reason that a tenancy is a contract (Progressive Mailing House P/L
v Tabali (1985) 157 CLR 17) and at common law a party cannot contract with
themself as both the landlord and the tenant (Cheshire and Fifoot’s Law of
Contracts 8 th ed at [3.11]; Kinnaird –Mills v Anderson 1999 NSWRT 33). In these
circumstances the Tribunal would have no jurisdiction.
[AustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
99. However the generality of the above proposition may need to be qualified in the
light of section 208 Civil Law (Property) Act 2006 (ACT) which permits a person
to assure property to themselves.
208 A person may assure property to—
tLI (a) himself or herself; or
(b) himself or herself and anyone else.
100. The “dictionary” to this Act defines an “assurance” as:
"assurance" includes a conveyance and a disposition made otherwise than by will.
101. The dictionary to the Legislation Act 2001 defines “property” to include
equitable interests.
102. It may be that the creation of a residential tenancy agreement or a tenancy at
common law answers the description of an “assurance” of “property” within the
meaning of section 208 and thus permits a person to enter a tenancy agreement
with themself as both landlord and tenant. If this were the case, and if on the facts Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
the Tribunal found that the Applicant and Respondent jointly held the equitable
title, then it would be open to the Tribunal to find that the Applicant and
Respondent in their capacity as joint equitable title holders entered a residential
tenancy agreement with the Applicant alone. In this event the Tribunal would
again become possessed of jurisdiction.
103. For present purposes it is not necessary to pursue this point, because the point
only arises if the Applicant has any “property” to assure i.e. if the Applicant is
first found to have an equitable interest in the premises.
104. Section 201 Civil Law (Property) Act 2006 relevantly provides that no legal or
equitable estate in land can be created except if evidenced in writing. Section 202
provides that any interest purportedly created by oral agreement takes effect only
as an interest at will:
201(1) An interest in land cannot be created or disposed of by a person except—
(a) by writing signed by the person or by the person's agent properly authorised in writing; or
(b) by the person's will; or
(c) by operation of law.
Note 1 The Legislation Act, dict, pt 1 defines "interest", in relation to land and other
property, and land .
Note 2 See also the Legislation Act, s 168 (References to person with interest in land
include personal representative etc).
(2) A declaration of trust by a person in relation to an interest in land must be—
(a) in writing signed by the person; or
(b) made by the person's will.
(3) A disposition by a person of an equitable interest or trust existing at the time of the
disposition must be—
(a) in writing signed by the person or by the person's agent properly authorised in writing; or
(b) made by the person's will.
(4) This section—
JAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! (a) does not affect the creation or operation of a resulting, implied or constructive trust; and
(b) is subject to section 202 (Creation of interests in land by word of mouth).
202(1) This section applies to an interest in land if the interest is—
(a) created by word of mouth; and
(b) not put into writing signed by the person creating it or by the person's agent properly
authorised in writing.
tLI (2) The interest is an interest at will only, whether or not consideration is given for it.
105. Section 201(4) creates an exception to the above general rule in the case of
“resulting, implied or constructive trusts”. Section 203 provides for an exceptions
in the case of lease for less than 3 years which is not relevant to the present issue
of whether the Respondent has assigned any part of the equitable title to the
Applicant (the equitable title is not a mere lease).
106. Section 204 then provides that the no suit lies in contract based on an
unwritten assignment of property:
204(1) A proceeding does not lie against a person on a contract for the sale or other
disposition of land unless the agreement on which the proceeding is brought, or a Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
memorandum or note of the agreement, is in writing signed by the person or by the person's
agent properly authorised in writing.
(2) This section—
(a) applies to contracts whenever they were made; and
(b) applies to land under the Land Titles Act 1925 ; and
(c) does not affect the law about part performance or sales by a court.
107. If the Applicant is found to have acquired a share of the equitable title it may
then be that her “rent” payments and renovation costs will constitute the “part
performance” required by section 204(2)(c) which operates as an exception to the
general bar to actions based on oral contracts for interests in land.
108. The Applicant’s claim to an equitable interest in the title to the property can
only arise in one of two way:
(a) If the Respondent is alleged to purchased the legal and the whole of the
equitable title in his own name and then subsequently “assured” to the
Applicant her part of the equitable title (what ever this part may be): or
(b) If the Applicant’s equitable interest arose at the point of purchase.
109. There has been no purported “assurance” by the Respondent to the Applicant
of any interest in the premises. The Applicant’s case is essentially that the
Respondent, by his words and conduct, has constituted himself a trustee for her of
her part of the equitable interest in the premises. Whether the relationship of
trustee arise at the point of purchase or after the purchase would make no
difference to the operation of section 201 as in either case the declaration of trust
must be in writing.
110. Accordingly, it seems to the Tribunal that the Applicant’s case can only
succeed if she can establish a resulting, implied or constructive trust operating in
her favour per the exception in section 201(4)(a).
111. In short, a “resulting trust” arises where the party purchasing the property does
so with the money or assets supplied in whole or part by another party. Such a
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! transaction raises a rebuttable presumption that the first party has acquired the
property as trustee, in whole or part, for the party who supplied the means of
acquiring the property. In general parties are presumed to take ownership in
proportion to the contributions made (Cleverly v Green (1984) 155 CLR 242).
112. In the present case the Applicant did not contribute any capital to the purchase
and did not participate in raising the mortgage. The highest the Applicant can put
her case in favour of a resulting trust is that her “rent” payments were in fact
mortgage payments and she contributed value in the renovations. The problems
for the Applicant with this argument are:
(a) the Tribunal is not satisfied that the “rent” payments were in fact mortgage
payments. Whether the Applicant asserted any equitable interest or not,
she still needed somewhere to live and was thus in a position of having to
pay rent, as she in fact was prior to the Respondent’s purchase. She
claimed the rent payments as rent in her tax returns. She received value for
the rent, namely a place to live.
(b) In order to establish a resulting trust the Applicant’s contribution must
arise at the point of purchase. Put at its highest, her contribution only Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
accrued over the 8 years of the arrangement. She did not make any initial
contribution at all.
113. Accordingly the Tribunal finds that no resulting trust existed in the present
case.
114. An “implied trust” is simply one that stands in contradistinction to an “express
trust”. It may be implied by operation of law or from the dealings of the party
evidence in writing. There is no scope for an implied trust in the present case.
115. A “constructive trust” arises in the context of a transaction for the acquisition
of an interest in land where the holder of the legal title (the Respondent) has, in
conjunction with the non-owner (the Applicant), demonstrated a common
intention that the non-owner will receive an interest in the land, and the holder of
the legal title has so conducted himself that it would be inequitable to allow him to
deny the non-owners interest (Gassing v Gassing [1971] AC 886; Brickyard v
Wall 1971 126 CLR 376).
116. The Applicant’s assertions in the present case appears to be directed to a
constructive trust.
117. The question then arises as to whether there was a common intention between
the Applicant and Respondent at the time of purchase along the lines of that
asserted by the Applicant, namely that the Respondent and herself would jointly
own the property and that she would have an option to buy out the Respondent’s
interest after 5 years for $20,000. The Tribunal has found as a fact that there was
no such common intention of the parties at the time at the time of the purchase.
Put at its highest for the Applicant, the parties were at the time of purchase
operating under a mistaken understanding of each other’s intention; but more
probably the Applicant did not have any such understanding at any time and only
raised the claim to joint ownership after 4 December 2007.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
118. If the Respondent at no point promised the Applicant any interest in the
premises other than a tenancy, then it cannot be unconscionable for him not to
now transfer to the Applicant any interest in the title.
119. For the reasons given in the two paragraphs immediately above, the Tribunal
finds that there is no constructive trust operating in favour of the Applicant.
Conclusion:
120. Absent any resulting, implied or constructive trust in favour of the Applicant,
her claim to a share in the equitable title to the premise must fail. From this
conclusion it then follows from paragraphs 93-96 above that the Applicant is a
tenant of the premises under a residential tenancy agreement or in the alternative
an “occupant” under an occupancy agreement per Part 5A Residential Tenancies
Act 1997. In either case the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and determine the
Respondent application for possession and any claim the Applicant may choose to
make against the Respondent for any breaches of the residential tenancy Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
agreement by the Respondent.
121. The matter is to be relisted for further directions.
A. Anforth
21st August 2008