IN THE TENANCY TRIBUNAL )
IN CANBERRA IN THE ) TT 508 OF 1997
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
Garden Network Pty Ltd
-v-
The Tsoulias Group
JAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
REASONS FOR DECISION OF PRESIDENT M. A. SOMES
DATED THE 26TH DAY OF MARCH 1998
tLI
A Notice of Dispute has been filed by Garden Network Pty Ltd (the tenant)
indicating that there is a dispute between the tenant and The Tsoulias Group (the
landlord) concerning the issue of a fair market rent to apply in relation to a lease
between the landlord and the tenant relating to Block 2, Section 72, Calwell. The
parties have filed written submissions and have agreed to the matter being considered
in chambers and a decision being given based upon the written submissions.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLI AustLi
The particular issue between the parties is whether the relationship is one that is
covered by the provisions of the Tenancy Tribunal Act 1994 (the Act) and more
particularly by the Commercial and Retail Leases Code of Practice (the Code). In
order to make a determination as to this issue it is necessary to decide when the lease
commenced.
Clause 3 of the Code is in the following terms:
“For the purposes of this Code, a lease is considered to have been entered
into when a person enters into possession of the premises as a tenant under
the lease or begins to pay rent under the lease (whichever happens first).
However, if both parties execute the lease before the tenant enters into
possession under the lease or begins to pay rent under the lease, the lease is
considered to have been entered into as soon as both parties have executed
the lease.”
The Act defines a lease in section 3 and further indicates in section 5 that a lease
as defined relates to retail premises. There appears to be no dispute between the
parties that subject to the question of the commencement date of the lease that the Act
would otherwise apply.
The basis of the dispute between the parties concerning the question of rental
relates to a provision in the existing lease which is conveniently described as a “ratchet
clause”. This term is defined in section 3 of the Act as follows:
““ratchet clause”, in relation to a provision in a lease for determining rent
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! variations in such a way that rent might decrease, means a provision in that
lease that has the effect of preventing, or giving a person the power to prevent,
that decrease.”
As I understand the submissions of the parties there is no dispute that the existing lease
contains a clause referred which would, by definition, be a “ratchet clause”. Such
clauses are now illegal.
Section 6 of the Act provides a specific ground of dispute relating to a “ratchet
clause”. This specific ground is found in 6(1)(e).
Section 8 (2) of the Act indicates that where there is a dispute relating to section
6(1)(e) then the Act applies provided the relevant lease is “entered into, renewed or
extended under an option on or after 1 January 1994; or (b) the dispute relates to a
provision of a lease, being a provision varied on or after that date.” Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
The tenant has raised an argument suggesting that there had been, in effect, a
variation to the lease on or after the 1st of January 1994 or, alternately, that the relevant
lease was entered into after the 1st of January 1994.
The submissions provided by the parties indicate that a Deed of Licence and
Agreement to Grant a Sublease was entered into between the parties on the 8th of
January 1993. This Agreement related to the intended erection of a building at Block
2, Section 72, Calwell. The Deed had annexed to it, as Annexure D, a document
entitled Lease which indicates in Item 3 of the Reference Schedule that the
commencement date was “Date next following notification of practical completion”.
The submissions of the landlord indicate that the practical completion of the building
took place in about June or July of 1993. However, the submissions also indicate that
the tenants took occupation in about May of 1993.
As indicated in the tenant’s submissions, and agreed to in part in the landlord’s
submissions, some discussions took place between the landlord’s agent and the
tenant’s agent subsequent to the execution of the agreement in January 1993 and
involved, in particular, discussions concerning car parks and a service yard. A further
document entitled “Lease” was entered into between the parties and bears the date
23.6.94. That document in Item 3 of the Reference Schedule indicates that the
commencement date is the 26th of May 1993. This, I assume, represents the actual
date upon which the tenants occupied the building in accordance with the Deed of
Licence and Agreement to Grant A Sublease dated the 8th of January 1993. The
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! document marked Exhibit B in the submissions of the landlord represents as I
understand the submissions of the parties the final concluded agreement in detail. It is
clear, however, that this lease document, while dated after the 1st of January 1994,
does not purport to commence on any date other than a date prior to the 1st of January
1994.
It is my view that the Code, therefore, does not apply to this lease as it is a lease
relating to an occupation of premises which occurred in about May of 1993 and the
lease document itself clearly purports to have commenced prior to the 1st of January
1994. Accordingly, the dispute which relates to the provisions of section 6(1)(e) is not
one which falls within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal under the Act, nor is it one which is
covered by the provisions of the Code.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi