UstLll AustLII AustLI
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
CITATION: Eirlys Josephine CHESSA & Matteo CHESSA –v- Commissioner
for Social Housing in the ACT [2008] ACTRTT (8)
RT 935 of 2008
Catchwords: Rent increases; comparative market rents; one landlord owns all
comparators
Tribunal: +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust A. Anforth, Member
Date: 17 February 2009
EIRLYS JOSEPHINE CHESSA and MATTEO CHESSA
(Applicant/Tenants)
AND:
COMMISSIONER FOR SOCIAL HOUSING IN THE ACT
(Respondent/Landlord)
DECISION
The rent increase is disallowed.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! A. Anforth - Member …………………………….
17th February 2009
EIRLYS JOSEPHINE CHESSA and MATTEO CHESSA
(Applicant/Tenants)
AND:
COMMISSIONER FOR SOCIAL HOUSING IN THE ACT
(Respondent/Landlord)
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. This matter concerns a rent increase at a tenancy at The Causeway, Kingston in
the ACT. The premises is a three bedroom stand alone house.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi
2. The tenancy commenced on 25 January 2005 at a rent of $260.00pw; in
November 2006 the rent was increased to $300.00pw; in November 2007 the rent
was increased to $315.00pw.
3. The landlord has now served notice dated 3 September 2008 on the tenants
advising a rent increase to $360.00pw as from 30 November 2008. Following an
internal review by the landlord the rent increase was reduced to $340.00pw.
4. The tenants applied to the Tribunal on 28 November 2008 for an order that the
rent increase to $340.00pw is excessive. Annexed to the application was the
following statement from the tenants:
1. Please identify the Issues In Dispute, for example, payment of rental arrears or that the lessor/grantor
fix a broken heater.
ustLII AustLI AustLI
Housing Market Rent Increase amount to $340.00, reviewed but still unjustified and unacceptable on the
grounds that painting is due since moving in (2005); that there is no car accommodation; that the condition
of the carpets at entry was unhealthy and that we had to change the floor covering ourselves; and that the
level of amenity of this area - already low and subject to the stigma of "slum" status - has actually
progressively diminished over the last four years even though nearby land values have gone through the
roof. The sense of insecurity and consequent stress of living here has also increased, as have health
problems, due to the constant noise, traffic and dust from the construction site.
2. Please state the nature of relief you seek, (what sort of order you want the tribunal to make), for
example, an order that the tenant/occupant pay rental arrears or the lessor/grantor fix the broken heater.
a. that the rent remain at $315 per week; or
b. that rent be increased to no more than $320 per week ONLY IF AND ONCE OUR HOUSE IS PAINTED
(as promised - see attached letter).
c. I would agree to the $340 only IF THERE WERE AT LEAST A CARPO RT ,
($20x 52w e e ks=$1 040 -close to the cost of a basic carport).
d. Finally, if at all possible, that all other rents in the Causeway area be adjusted accordingly.
Please note that since this area is to be demolished soon and it is unlikely ACT Housing will build us a
carport or allow us to build one which would remain their property when we vacate the premises, option (a)
and (b) above appear to be the only realistic relief available.
3. Please give a brief history of the dispute, (why you are making the application). If you are claiming
money please show calculations and total amount claimed.
We have been asking for floors to be changed and walls and doors to be repaired and painted since we moved
in (Jan 2005). In August 2005 we were authorised to make these improvements at our expense, which we
proceeded to do, at least in part.
We did not dispute our first market rent increase in 2006 (from $260.00 to $300.00 per week) because at the
time we were on rebated rent and we did not fully understand the implications of the increase itself. In actual
fact, the $40.00 increase (15%) was well over the maximum amount (June 2006 CPI index for residential
rent was 2.9% so the maximum allowable increase would have been 3.48%). This failure to act is common
to many public housing tenants, as the text of the annual letter is misleading. *
When rent was increased by another 14% to $320.00 last year, I appealed against the decision on various
grounds (copies of letter and supporting documentation attached). I was only successful in having it reduced
by $5.00. The CPI index for that year was 5.4, so the rent increase should have been no more than 6.48%.
Although I would have wished to pursue the matter with the Tribunal, the time given by the letter was
insufficient. Even this year, upon receiving the letter with the result of the review, I only had 10 working
days available in which to lodge my appeal to the Tribunal.
tLIIAustLIJ
This year I again disputed the standard market increase, following the proposal to increase the rent to
$360.00 per week, on similar and additional grounds (attached documentation includes calculations).
Although ACT Housing have now reviewed the rent increase to $340 per week, I still do not believe this
reflects the reality of the situation. I believe the latest valuation still does not consider the depreciation of
rents IN THIS PARTICU LAR STREET and in the one behind it (Spinifex St), due to progressively
diminished amenity, less availability of public transport and loss of community services. It also does not
consider the stigma attached to living in this area, which is obvious to us every day, in the discrimination we
experience when we try to socialise, apply for jobs, go to the doctor or other offices, sell or trade in a vehicle
or other items. *
We now understand that ACT Housing increases market rent on all properties every year, based on an
independent valuation of market rents in the area. Howeve r, the rents are often increased more that the
allowed %20 of the increase in the CPI for residential rent (as stated in the Residential Tenancies Act AUSEL !!
1997), even when there has been little or no maintenance work done or other improveme nts to the
property. Since excessive rent increases have to be justified by the lessor, ACT Housing itself has been
at fault in respect of the majority of its tenants for several years. While amenity is an importa nt factor in
estimatin g private rentals, it does not appea r to be conside red in public housing rentals. ASELII
When we first moved here in January 2005, we were told we could finally settle down since we would
have security of tenure. Having been homeless for over a year, this was good news. The only noticeable
construction work was near Wentw orth Avenue and Printers Way and our street was quiet, with no
trucks or earth moving equipm ent visible. Only a couple of months later, we were informed that the
whole area would be demolishe d and redevelope d over an indefinite period of time (5 to 10 years).
Demolition crews and construction worke rs and their equipm ent took over the area within another few
weeks, and dust and rubbish started blowing over into our gardens. We still are no closer to knowing
what will become of us and when. This is unsettling and profoundly stressful for the entire community.
Considering the experienc e of living in this area for almost four years, we are now in the position to state
that IF, at the time of being offered the property, we had known more about the reputation and standards
of living associated with this area (The Causewa y) AND had not been homeless and fairly desperate to
move out of supported accomm odation, we probably would NOT have accepted the property. On the
other hand we were told if we did not accept this place we would then be forced to accept the next or
forgo the right to a property altogether and start the whole application process again. The conseque nt
state of mind at the time also accounts for us accepting a house with no car accom modation, cracked
drivew ay and surrounding pavem ents, broken fences and roof, dirty carpets and floors, holes in walls
and urgently due for repainting, inside and out.
Finally, if we consider all the allowa ble increases according to Residential Tenancies Act and the CPI
index for residential rent since our starting rent of $260.00 in 2005 -2006 (that is 3.48% for 2006, 6.48%
for 2007 and 8.84% for 2008), the current rent should not be more than $312 per week.
DOCUMENTS ATTACHED:
Date* Document
24.09.200 7 DHCS letter - Review of Public Housing Rents 2007
0^.10.2007 Tenants' applicatio n for review of decision, with accom panying documentation
12.10.200 7 DHCS letter acknow ledging application and advising of review process
13.12.200 7 DHCS letter advising outcome of review of decision
July 2008 Letter from Spotless announcing intention to paint premises
03.09.200 8 DHCS letter - Review of Public Housing Rents 2008
15.09.2008 Tenants' application for review of decisio n - form only
30.09.2008 DHCS Property inspecti on report
10.11.2008 DHCS letter advising outcom e of review of decisio n.
* date on actual document. Letters may actually arrive up to 10 days later than date of signature.
DOCUMENTS REQUESTED FROM ACT HOUSING AND TO BE ATTACHED TO
THIS APPLICATION WHEN SUPPLIED:
• transcript of internal reviews 2007 and 2008
tLIIAustLIJ • results of all independent valuations on the property since Jan 2007
• evidence with date carpets cleaned prior to entry
• evidence with date of painting walls
• evidence with date of laying original carpet and any changes of carpet
5. On 14 January 2009 the Commissioner filed her submissions which read as
follows:
1. The applica nts comm e nc ed their tenanc y with Housi n g ACT on 25 Januar y 2005. A copy of the
said Reside ntial Tenan cy Agree m e nt is annexe d hereto and marked with the letter "A".
2. On 03 Septem be r 2008 the respond ents sent a letter to the applica nts inform ing them that the
market rent was to increa se on 30 Nove m ber 2008 from $630.0 0 per fortnig ht to $720. 00 per
fortnig ht. ($315 .00 per week to $360.00 per week an increa se of 14.28 % ) A copy of the said letter .ustLII AustLI AustLI
is annex ed hereto and marke d with the letter "B".
3. On 10 Nove mb er 2008 the respon de nts wrote to the applic a nts inform ing them that, follow ing an
indepe nde nt valuatio n of the property , the propose d rent increa se would be redu c ed to $340.00 per
week . (7.93% ) A copy of the said letter is annexe d hereto and marked with the letter "C".
4. The respond ents would observ e that the adjuste d rent incre ase from $315.0 0 per week to $340.00
per week is within the criteria for non excessiv e rent increase s set out in S68 (2) (a) of the
Residential tenan cies Act 1997.
68 Guideline for orders
(1) The tribunal must allow a rental rate increase that is in accordance with the
standard residential tenancy terms unless the increase is excessive.
(2) For subsection (1)—
(a) unless the tenant satisfies the tribunal otherwise, a rental rate increase is not excessive if it
is less than 20% greater than any increase in the index number over the period since the last
rental rate increase or since the beginning of the lease (whichever is later)
5. From the comm enc e m ent of their tenan cy 25 Januar y 2005 until Marc h 2008 the applica nts
enjoye d a rebate d rent making this rent increa se the first that has affected the applic a nts.
6. The property was fully painted internally in Septembe r 1999 and is scheduled to be repainte d in the
2008/2009 tax year. The laundry was repainte d in January 2005. Screen prints are annexe d hereto and
marked with the letter "D & E".
7. The property was fully carpeted and vinyl laid in August 1999 and steam cleane d throughout in
January 2005. Screen prints are annexed hereto and marked with the letter "F & G".
8. The ingoing property condition report signed by the applicants 27 January 2005 details the internal
paint as fair wear and tear in the lounge, hall and dining areas, clean but marked in the bedroom s and
good in the remaining rooms. The floor coverings are listed as clean with marks or good. The
applicants in the annexure to the property condition report have stated that the carpets are "very worn".
A copy of the property condition report and annexure is annexed hereto and marke d with the letter "H".
9. The property has never had a car port or garage.
10. The indepen dent valuation dated 30 Septem ber 2008 is based upon the property as is without
improve me nt. A copy of the indepen dent valuation is annexed hereto and marked with the letter "I".
11 .A list of the properties available for rent in the Kingston area on Allhomes dated 30 Decem ber 2008
is annexe d hereto and marked with the letter "J".
12. For the reasons above and the comparison of market rents include d in the indepe ndent valuation
dated 30 September 2008, the Responde nts believe that the proposed rental increa se is not excessive
tLIIAustLIJ and should be allowe d.
6. The matter was listed before the Tribunal on 19 January 2009. Both tenants
appeared in person and Mr Adkins appeared for the Commissioner.
7. The tenants tendered a submission together with a range of attached documents.
The submission read:
The comments in the Submission prepared by the Respondent have been noted. However, the Applicants
consider most of these comments to be irrelevant, dismissive and in some cases even offensive, not
appearing to have considered the applicants' statements in the "history of the dispute" and documentation
attached to the original Application.
.ustLII AustLI AustLI
We would like to highlight the fact that we, a family of 2 working adults and 3 children, became Housing
tenants after having been homeless and moving between temporary accommodation and various refuges
for almost two years. During our tenancy we never asked for unemployment benefits, since our work
hours and pay were always fluctuating. We strive to improve our situation and are proud of being able to
finally afford market rent. Yet, as mentioned in both applications, we constantly have to fight against the
stigma of living in the Causeway, a planet apart from nearby Kingston, and market rent should be adjusted
to reflect this.
Applicant's comments on Submission dated 30/12/08 prepared by Respondent:
Point 4: No mention is made of PRIOR rent increases, all of which were found to be excessive by the
Applicants, regardless of whether an "application to review decision" was made at the time (please refer to
original documentation).
Point 5: This comment is to be considered irrelevant, misleading and offensive, as it implies that
Housing tenants are in a rut and expected to remain so, or that BECAUSE they are - or have been -on
rebated rent, they should not be attempting to dispute market rent increases even though entitled to do so
by law. We did not "enjoy" rebated rent, we felt somehow humiliated by the fact we needed it. That is
why we are proud now to pay full market rent, but a just amount, reflecting the reality of the location.
The comment also implies that the increased cost of living in the ACT has not affected us. If anything it
affects us more, once added to market rent: passing the "income barrier" results in an immediate and an
extremely steep increase in all everyday expenses. The fact that rent is rebated has nothing to do with the
appropriateness of the market rent increase.
Points 6-8: The property to date has NOT been repainted. We consider the internal repainting and our
substitution of the flooring to be essential repairs for health reasons, not improvements. We maintain
market rent should be paid only AFTER painting has been completed. Condition of external paint was not
mentioned. Our additional comments on the state of the carpet outside the bathroom (evidence cleaning
prior to entry had been inadequate) were also not mentioned. On these grounds alone, the increases of
2006, 2007 and 2008 are ALL excessive.
Point 9: Is to be considered in our favour, since most comparable properties have some form of car
accommodation. The statement is also incorrect and misleading, in that there is physical and anecdotal
evidence that the previous tenant had built not only a garage but a carport and a pergola, and was asked to
remove them before vacating this property. Storage space is inadequate, both inside and out: the shed is minimal
and there are no built-in wardrobes in the bedrooms, also present in most comparable properties (please refer
also to the attached documentation).
Point 11: The list supplied is dismissive, irrelevant (apartments and units) and incomplete (no property
details, i.e. n. of bathrooms, type of heating/air con, BIRs, car accommodation, state of repair and recent
improvements). It is insulting to us, as we do not have the option to rent privately due to our current status.
It proves only that there are NO comparable properties nearby.
By definition, as cited in the attached letter from Housing dated 1 August 2008, "the market rent for a Housing
ACT property is based on the rent likely to be paid for an equivalent property in the private rental market in a
similar location, and of similar size and amenity".
tLIIAustLIJ
In fact, this whole suburb is marked for demolition/redevelopment under the East Lake Renewal Project,
therefore condemned. The area is apparently still zoned as temporary accommodation, and the houses are little
more than kit homes ("govies") notably of less value in real estate terms. None of the properties have car
accommodation. The state of repair of the adjoining properties (n. 10 and 14) is now worse than when we
first arrived and further depreciates the one we occupy. Here is a vacant lot on our street an n.4, from a house
that burnt down in October 2007. This also has not been at all considered by the independent valuers,
whereas on the private market, "street appeal" can carry up to 50% of the value of a property.
It is scarcely believable that ACT Housing (and therefore the ACT Government) could be so out of touch with
reality as to assume that this area is comparable to any other in Kingston. To do so is an insult to the intelligence
of its own tenants and of the entire community.
Amenity here is IN NO WAY comparable to that offered in areas where private rent is available. For four years AUSEL !!
we have lived in front of a morgue, a power station and a permanent building site, breathing the dust from
mounds of dirt higher than our houses which according to a Canberra Times article some time ago were even
been found to contain traces of heavy metal. Rubbish from the site blows into our gardens and along the road,
giving it an unkempt look. Maintenance of nature strips, pavements and the public land section of driveways is ASELII
kept to a bare minimum. Not far behind us we have the sewage treatment works and old toxic waste dump sites.
Our access to the pleasanter areas around the lake was barred by fences, and footpaths to Wentworth Avenue
were only recently completed and opened. The street lighting is for the new development only, and finishes
halfway down Dawes Street, leaving us in the dark to walk home from the Wentworth Avenue bus stops in
winter.
When we arrived in January 2005 we had a bus service which took us to Deakin and the Hospitals in
20minutes, a preschool and a public phone two blocks away, and a library within walking distance. All four are
now gone. Even the Legislative Assembly stated (15/03/07) that ACTION had given insufficient explanation
for why the 84, considered an "essential route", had been cut. In short, since moving in, we pay more money
for fewer services in an area whose image is getting worse not better. We feel that $320 a week is a fair
amount until the next rent review.
List of attached documentation
(including documents released by Housing ACT, as announced in original application)
- ACT Housing letter explaining market rent reviews, 01/08/08
- ACT Housing letter in response to request for release of documentation, 02/12/08
- independent valuation of property, 29/10/2007, supplied by Housing ACT
- transcript of market rent review summaries (2007 - 2008), supplied by Housing ACT
- extract from ACT Legislative Assembly Standing Committee on Planning and the Environment
Report 29, 2007 "ACTION Buses and the Sustainable Transport Plan"
- extract from public opinion website RIOT ACT, describing the Causeway
- list of comparative private rent prices in Canberra/Queanbeyan area (web sources)
- Canberra Times article and public comments "Causeway being left to wither", 17/07/2008
Documentation announced by Applicants, attached to ACT Housing Submission:
- evidence, with dates, of laying of original carpet and carpet cleaning prior to entry
- evidence, with dates, of full and/or partial indoor paintwork completed
-independent valuation of property, 2008.
8. At the hearing the tenants developed their concerns about the lack of maintenance
of their house, the range of improvement that they had themselves made to the
house and the general lack of amenity of the Causeway area.
9. The tenants said that they had laid new floors in the house except in the kitchen;
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! painted several rooms, installed new handles in the kitchen and showerhead in the
shower; built a brick retaining wall at the rear of the house and created a garden.
10. The tenants pointed out that within the Causeway area there were 50 houses of
which 45 were owned by the Commissioner. Of the five privately owned houses
only one is rented at $400.00 pw. There was no evidence concerning the standard
of this particular house.
11. The tenants asserted that the Commissioner had plans to demolish their house and
other houses in the Causeway area. Mr Adkins denied any knowledge of such a
plan.
12. The tenants asserted that the Causeway area had been neglected by the ACT
government and was now badly run down. They pointed to a deterioration in the
roads, loss of street lighting and a reduction of bus services.
13. The tenants invited the Tribunal to view their house and the Causeway area. The
hearing was adjourned to 30 January 2009 for a view.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
14. At the view both tenants were present as was Mr Adkins for the Commissioner
with the relevant housing officer from the Commissioner’s office. The Tribunal
first viewed the inside of the house, then the yard and then drove around the
Causeway area.
15. There is no question but that the house is in a poor state of repair. The tenants’
own work in laying new floors and painting most of the interior of the house was
noted. The tenants showed the Tribunal and Mr Adkins the various items in the
house that they asserted required maintenance.
16. The yard was rough with building rubble left from previous works carried out by
the Commissioner presumably prior to 1995. The housing officer undertook to
remove this material.
17. The tenants asserted that some of this building material contained asbestos and
produced a report by Asbestos Consultants & Removalist dated 19 January 09
which stated that asbestos concentrations existed in the building rubble and in the
back yard.
18. The Tribunal noted the poor state of maintenance of the adjacent yards and the
housing officer said that he would have tradesmen attend to the rubbish and piles
of rotting matter in the adjacent yard.
19. The general area was severally affected by the developments going on in
Kingston. The roads had not been maintained and suffered from pot holes. There
was no landscaping. The Tribunal noted the extent of the walk to the bus stops and
the tenants’ assertion that the street lighting for that journey was not operative.
20. The tenants complained of the truck traffic from the adjacent development and the
unattractive appearance of the development. The Tribunal had no difficult
understanding this complaint although there was little truck activity at the time of
the view.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
21. The Commissioner advised that the house is due for painting inside and outside in
the 2008/2009 financial year but could not be more precise. It has been 10 years
since the last painting was done by the Commissioner.
The legislation:
22. .The relevant provisions are found in sections 67-70 Residential Tenancies Act
1997 which reads as follows:
67 Orders
The tribunal may make the following orders in relation to an application for review of a rental
rate increase:
(a) an order allowing the increase applied for or the other increase that the tribunal considers
just;
(b) an order disallowing the increase;
(c) an order disallowing part of the increase.
68 Guideline for orders
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
(1) The tribunal must allow a rental rate increase that is in accordance with the standard
residential tenancy terms unless the increase is excessive.
(2) For subsection (1)—
(a) unless the tenant satisfies the tribunal otherwise, a rental rate increase is not excessive if it
is less than 20% greater than any increase in the index number over the period since the last
rental rate increase or since the beginning of the lease (whichever is later); and
(b) unless the lessor satisfies the tribunal otherwise, a rental rate increase is excessive if it is
more than 20% greater than any increase in the index number over the period since the last
rental rate increase or since the beginning of the lease (whichever is later).
(3) If a tenant or lessor proposes that a rental rate increase is or is not excessive, the tribunal,
in considering whether it is satisfied about the proposal, must consider the following matters:
(a) the rental rate before the proposed increase;
(b) if the lessor previously increased the rental rate while the relevant tenant was tenant—
(i) the amount of the last increase before the proposed increase; and
(ii) the period since that increase;
(c) outgoings or costs of the lessor in relation to the premises;
(d) services provided by the lessor to the tenant;
(e) the value of fixtures and goods supplied by the lessor as part of the tenancy;
(f) the state of repair of the premises;
(g) rental rates for comparable premises;
(h) the value of any work performed or improvements carried out by the tenant with the
lessor’s consent;
(i) any other matter the tribunal considers relevant.
(4) If the tribunal considers a proposed rental rate increase is excessive but a lesser increase
would not be, it may disallow so much of the increase as is excessive.
(5) In subsection (2):
index number means the rents component of the housing group of the Consumer Price Index
for Canberra published from time to time by the Australian statistician.
69 Effect of orders
(1) If the tribunal makes an order under section 67 (a) or (c), the rental rate increase takes
effect from the date when the proposed increase would, apart from section 66, have taken
place.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! (2) The tribunal may, on application, grant a tenant time to pay rent owed because of the
operation of subsection (1).
(3) If—
(a) the tribunal makes an order mentioned in section 67 (b) or (c); and
(b) despite section 66, the tenant has paid the lessor the full amount of the rental rate increase
proposed by the lessor;
the tribunal may order the lessor to pay to the tenant the difference between the amount the
tenant paid to the lessor and the amount that was payable.
70 Further increases
If a proposed rental rate increase has been reviewed by the tribunal, any further purported
increase in the rental rate for a period of 12 months after the day the proposed increase was to
take effect is void.
23. The tenants referred to the role of the 20% increase on the Housing CPI in section
68(2) on several occasions. The Tribunal explained that this figures is only
relevant to determining where the onus of proof lies in establishing the
excessiveness of the rent increase (Commissioner for Housing v Key [2004]
ACTCA 17). In the present case because the proposed rent increase did not Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
exceed this threshold, the Tenant bears the evidential onus.
24. The Tribunal is required to consider the matters listed in section 68(3)(a)-(i). The
tenants raised considerations (a)-(b) in their submission that the rent increases
imposed on them over the years since becoming tenants in the premises were
burdensome and not consistent with the run down nature of the neighbourhood. If
viewed only as a percentage rate of increase in rent then the relevant historical
increases imposed on the tenants are consistent with the general trend in the ACT
rental market.
25. However the tenants case is essentially that the poor state of maintenance of their
house, their own improvements to the property and the general deterioration in the
Causeway neighbourhood make it unfair to simply apply historical market trends.
26. The tenants real concerns appear to be directed to the considerations in paragraphs
(f),(g) and (h) of section 68(3).
27. In terms of consideration (f), the Tribunal has no difficulties in finding as a fact
that the premises were not properly maintained by the Commissioner and were in
a general poor state of repair. The only maintenance of any significance since the
commencement of the tenancy in 2005 is that carried out by the tenants
themselves which is a relevant consideration under paragraph (h).
28. Paragraph (g) raises the issues of the rents for comparative premises. The
valuation relied upon by the Commissioner relied upon units in new developments
in Kingston. Even the most casual inspection of the areas demonstrates the
inappropriateness of any such comparison. In fairness to Mr Adkins he did not
press those comparisons.
29. In the Causeway area itself 45 of the 50 house were owned by the Commissioner
and tenanted. They were all on essentially the same rent depending on the number
of bedrooms ranging from $320 per week to $390 per week.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! 30. Whilst these houses are obviously the most comparative for present purposes,
there is an obvious problem with relying upon them for the purposes of the present
application. In any situation were the same landlord owns essentially the whole of
the relevant housing stock there is no true competition for rents. The landlord is
free to charge whatever rent the landlord chooses. In the present case the
Commissioner could for example raise the rents on some premises and then rely
upon those rent increase to support a rent increase on other premises in the same
housing stock. This leap frogging process could be repeated over and over with
the outcome that the rents may bear little relationship to the external market.
31. It might be thought that the weakness in the above argument is that the tenants
involved in the first round of rent increases would oppose those increases and
thereby thwart any future leap frogging. But most of the Commissioner’s tenants
in the Causeway would be on rebated rent and so an increase in the market rent
would not directly affect them. Tenants in this position are unlikely to spend the
time and effort required to oppose a rent increase. Once a good number of such
rent increases have occurred these increases may then form the basis for dragging
up the rents of those tenants who are not on rebates and who may oppose the rent Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
increase.
32. In any event the Tribunal is not convinced that recourse to the existing
government rents in the Causeway is a good guide to whether any particular rent
increase is excessive or not. Each case must be determined on its own facts having
regard to the considerations in paragraph 68(3) and it is most unlikely that each of
the Commissioners tenancies in the Causeway satisfies these criteria in
approximately the same way.
33. Further, the presently constituted Tribunal does not accept that the Commissioner
has a legal or social duty to engage in rent increases to the maximum extent that
comparisons with the private market will bear. The reasons for this conclusion are
set out in Atherton v Commissioner for Housing [2007] ACTRTT 20; Donohue v
Havelock Housing Association [2007] ACTRTT 1; and in Davy v NSW Land and
Housing Corporation 2007 NSWCTTT 25.
34. The Tribunal accepts as a fact that:
(a) the Applicants’ premises is in a poor state of repair
(b) the Applicants have invested substantial time and money into improvements
(c) the neighbourhood is run down
(d) the road, street lighting and bus services are poor relative to other suburbs in
Canberra
(e) the adjacent development causes noise and dust pollution.
35. The Tribunal is satisfied that the proposed rent increase is excessive. Whether any
increase is justified in the light to the substantial historical increases to date is
doubtful. If the 20%m increase on the housing CPI were applied then the rent
increase would be of the order of $30.00 per week. But there is no obvious
rationale for applying this percentage increase.
36. The rent increase is disallowed and the rent is therefore to remain at $315pw.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
A. Anforth
17th February 2009
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi