AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
CITATION: DANIEL EMLYN-JONES AND FEDERAL
CAPITAL PRESS [Interevener: HUMAN
RIGHTS COMMISSIONER]
DT 577/2005
Catchwords: Discrimination – interpretation of the Act -
sexuality – homosexuality - unfavourable treatment
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! – causal connection – standard of proof -
discrimination in the provisions of goods, services
and facilities – vilification – incitement – public act -
human rights – freedom of expression – right to
privacy – right to reputation – publication –
on-line forum.
Provisions considered
Discrimination Act 1991 (Republication No. 19),
ss. 4, 7, 8, 20, 65 and 66.
Human Rights Act 2004 (Republication No. 1),
ss. 8, 12, 16, 28, 30, 31 and 36.
List of cases cited
ACT Department of Education & Training v Prendergast
[2000] ACTDT 6 Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Almassey and Omari and ACT Multicultural Council Inc
[2008] ACTDT 2
Australian Capital Television P/L v Commonwealth (2)
(1992) 177 CLR 106
Brandenberg v Ohio 395 U.S. 44 [89 S.Ct. 1827 (1969)]
Briginshaw v Briginshaw [1938] HCA 34; (1938) 60 CLR 336
Bropho v Human Rights & Equal Opportunity Commission
[2004] FCAFC 16
Burns v Dye [2002] NSWADT 32
Burns v Laws (No 2) [2007] NSWADT 47
Burns v Laws (EOD) [2008] NSWADTAP 32
Burns v Radio 2UE Sydney Pty Ltd & Ors [2004] NSW ADT 267
Catch the Fire Ministries Inc & Ors v Islamic Council of Victoria Inc
[2006] VSCA 284
Edgley v Federal Capital Press of Australia Pty Ltd [1999] ACTSC 95
Hagan v Trustees of the Toowoomba Sports Ground Trust
[2001] FCA 1615
Hagan v Trustees of the Toowoomba Sports Ground Trust
[2001] FCA 123
Harrison v ACT Housing [2002] ACTDT 3
I W v City of Perth (1997) 191 CLR 1 at 11
Johnston v Dallarooma Pty Ltd [1999] ACTDT 8
Kazak v John Fairfax Publications Limited [2000] NSWADT 77
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation [1997] 189 CLR 520
Lewin v ACT Health & Community Care Service [2002] ACDT 2
Michael Firestone v Australian National University [2009] ACTDT 1
Peters v Constance [2005] QADT 9
Purvis v NSW (Department of Education and Training) [2003] HCA 62
Re Prezzi and Discrimination Commissioner and Quest Group Pty Ltd
(1996) 39 ALD 729
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Sunol v Collier (EOD) [2006] NSWADTAP 51
Theophanous v The Herald and Weekly Times Ltd [1992-1994] 182
CLR 104
Toben v Jones [2003] FCAFC 137
Veloskey v Karagiannakis [2002] NSWADTAP 18
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL ) NO: DT 577 OF 2005
RE: DANIEL EMLYN-JONES
Applicant
AND: FEDERAL CAPITAL
PRESS OF AUSTRALIA
Respondent
AND: HUM AN RIGHTS
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! COMMISSIONER
Intervener
ORDER
Tribunal : Mr R J Cahill, President
Date : 31 July 2009
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS:
1. That the Applicant’s complaint that the Respondent
unlawfully discriminated against him in providing a
service and facility of on-line forum, because of the
Applicant’s sexuality, be dismissed, pursuant to
section 102(2)(a)(ii)of the Discrimination Act 1991 (as it AustLI AustLll AustLI AustLi
stood at the time the complaint was made), on the ground
that the complaint has not been substantiated.
2. That the Applicant’s claim that the Respondent
breached section 66(1) of the Act by unlawfully vilifying a
group of persons on the ground of their sexuality has
been substantiated, but no claim to unlawful
vilification of the Applicant individually has been
established.
3. That the Respondent has not been liable for unlawful
vilification on the ground that it has established to the
satisfaction of the Tribunal the defence under
section 66(2) of the Act, namely, that its publications
were a public act, done reasonably and honestly, for
purposes in the public interest, including discussion
or debate about and presentations of any matter.
4. That the Respondent’s claim that the Discrimination
Commissioner acted outside the Commissioner’s
jurisdiction in investigating the Complainant’s complaint
has not been established.
5. That the parties bear their own costs in relation to this
matter.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
...............................
President
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
AustLII AustLI
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY ) NO: DT 577 of 2005
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL )
RE: DANIEL EMLYN-JONES
Applicant
AND: FEDERAL CAPITAL
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! PRESS
Respondent
AND: HUM AN RIGHTS
COMMISSIONER
Intervener
REASONS
R J Cahill, President
31 July 2009
SILI AustLI AustLij
INDEX
Heading Page
number
PART 1 – PRELIMINARY M ATTERS 2
Background to the complaint 2
Procedural History 5
Scope of the complaint 6
Submissions from three parties 6
PART 2 – UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION 11
The legislative scheme – discrimination 11
Allegation of discrimination – acts and omissions 13
Direct/indirect discrimination 14
Unfavourable treatment 15
Causal connection 17
Discrimination in providing services 19
Respondent’s submission on discrimination 20
Different treatment 21
On-line forum environment 22
Discrimination – finding 23
Discrimination Commissioner’s views on discrimination 24
and human rights
Need to address legal issues 27
Nature of posts in the forum 28
PART 3 – VILIFICATION 28
Legislative scheme - vilification 28
Elements of unlawful vilification 29
Issue of context 41
Relevant context 44
Vilification - finding 45
PART 4 – DEFENCE UNDER SECTION 66(2)(C) 48
Elements of the defence 48
Respondent’s justification for publishing the posts 49
Principles followed by the Respondent 52
Defence – finding 53
Aspects of “reasonableness” and “honesty” 54
Vilification of the Application would make a difference 55
The human rights context 56
tLI PART 5 – HUM AN RIGHTS COMMISSIONER’S 56
SUBM ISSION ON THE APPLICATION OF THE HUMAN
RIGHTS ACT 2004
Provisions of the Human Rights Act 56
Limit on freedom of expression and other rights 60
PART 6 – COMMISSIONER’S ROLE TO INVESTIGATE 64
A COMPLAINT
Respondent’s contention 64
Basis of the Commissioner’s action 65
Commissioner and Respondent 67
My conclusion 67
PART 7 – GENERAL COMMENTS 68 Must !! AukZZI AustLI AustLi
PART 8 – REM EDY SOUGHT BY THE APPLICANT 72
PART 1 – PRELIMINARY M ATTERS
Background to the complaint
1. On 24 August 2005, the Applicant, Dr Daniel Emlyn-Jones,
initiated a complaint with the ACT Discrimination Commissioner
against the Respondent, the Federal Capital Press of Australia Pty Ltd,
in its role as registered proprietor of The Canberra Times. [The
Respondent is also sometimes referred to in this decision as the TCT
or the Canberra Times.]
2. The Applicant alleged that the Respondent had:
(a) discriminated against him on the ground of his sexuality
within the meaning of section 7 and section 20 of the
Discrimination Act 1991 (also referred to as “the Act’);
and
(b) engaged in conduct amounting to unlawful vilification
within the meaning of section 66 of the Discrimination
Act.
3. Section 7 of the Act lists the grounds of discrimination,
including sexuality. Section 20 provides that it is unlawful to
discriminate against a person in the area of providing goods, services
or facilities. Section 66 deals with unlawful vilification. Vilification on
the ground of sexuality is unlawful.
4. The Discrimination Act has been amended a number of times
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! since the date of the complaint of Dr Emlyn-Jones. The relevant
version of the Act that applies to the complaint is the ”Republication
No. 19 (effective 10 January 2005 – 10 January 2006)”, which was
operative at the time the complaint was made to the ACT Human
Rights Office in August 2005.
5. The conduct complained of was that, from July to August of
2005, the Canberra Times allowed certain posts to be included in the
Canberra Times’ “Have Your Say” on-line community forum. This
service is also described as an “on-line forum” or “the forum” for the
purposes of this decision.
6. Since the complaint was lodged with the Commissioner, the
Canberra Times has removed the forum. When it was available, the
on-line community forum could be accessed through the Canberra
Times on-line home page. The site invited readers to comment on any
Canberra Times’ articles or highlight a topic affecting the community.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
7. The Applicant asserts that particular comments posted on the
forum discriminated against, and vilified, him on the basis of his
sexuality, in particular because the Applicant is a gay.
8. On 24 September 2005, after the ACT Human Rights and
Discrimination Commissioner (sometimes in this decision referred to
as the Human Rights Commissioner or the Discrimination
Commissioner, by which title the Commissioner is currently known)
requested a formal reply to the Applicant’s allegations, but prior to the
Commissioner receiving any formal reply from the Respondent, the
Canberra Times published an article (purportedly on
24 September 2005) written by the editor of the forum (T-document
10). This article pertained directly to the Applicant’s complaint and
questioned the power the ACT Human Rights and Discrimination
Commissioner had to make any orders with respect to the complaints
by the Applicant. This article also described the comments
complained of as “debates” and stated that the Respondent had
allowed these debates to continue uncensored in consideration of the
benefits of free speech.
9. In a letter (email) to the ACT Human Rights Commissioner of
27 September 2005 (T – document 12), the editor of the forum stated
that he scrutinised and approved material for publication on the on-
line community forum. The editor explained that, from time to time,
he edited or even rejected letters to remove particularly offensive
comments. The basis for edit or rejection included grounds such as
defamation, contempt, taste, unacceptable levels of personal abuse,
patent errors of fact and discriminatory material amounting to
vilification. The editor also stated that the community forum was a
general forum for citizens and, therefore, in the discretion he exercised
over the edit of the site, he maintained a high threshold for acceptable
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! material and barred no subject areas from discussion or even robust
debate.
10. The Respondent denied any act of sexuality discrimination and
claimed that, in any event, asserted that its conduct was protected by
all of the general doctrines of freedom of speech and freedom of
political dissemination. The Respondent also questioned the
jurisdiction of the Human Rights Commissioner. I have addressed
this issue PART 6 of this decision.
11. On 24 October 2005, in reply to a request to furnish further
information, the Respondent wrote to the Human Rights
Commissioner, addressing only the contention that the Commission
was not acting within jurisdiction.
12. After consideration of the submissions placed before her, the
Human Rights and Discrimination Commissioner determined that
Dr Emlyn-Jones’ complaint raised issues under the Discrimination Act Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
with respect to discrimination, but not with respect to vilification. The
Commissioner’s submissions to the Tribunal state that:
‘16. The Discrimination Commissioner formed the view that
the material complained of was in part “very
contemptuous of homosexuals”, and that it contained
“specific abuse and contempt of homosexuals” that went
beyond “mere statement of opinion” (T – document 19,
p.6).
17. The Discrimination Commissioner determined the
vilification as defined in s66 of the Discrimination Act
required a “high level of conduct” on the part of the
person alleged to have engaged in the conduct
(T - document 19, p.7). The Commissioner considered
that the actual conduct of the Respondent may not meet
that test.’
13. Also, the Human Rights and Discrimination Commissioner
determined that “it was [The Canberra Times’] responsibility to ensure
that the website was operated in a manner that did not enable
discriminatory material to be published.” (T-document 19, p.7).
14. The Commissioner further determined that these issues were
unlikely to be resolved by conciliation. On that basis, on
22 December 2005, the Commissioner referred the complaint to the
Determination Tribunal, with the consent of the Applicant.
Procedural History
15. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! On 4 January 2006, the Discrimination Tribunal set a hearing
for 3 February 2006. On 20 January 2006, Dr Emlyn-Jones wrote to
the editor of the forum, stating that he had no interest in damaging
the reputation of the Canberra Times or the reputation of the editor,
and that he was willing to conciliate. In a return e-mail to Dr Emlyn-
Jones on 23 January 2006, the Respondent advised that it considered
that the underlying issue to the complaint was defence of the right to
freedom of speech and that the Respondent would not engage in
conciliation.
16. At the hearing of 3 February 2006, the Tribunal made Orders
that Dr Emlyn-Jones provide the Respondent with the basis of the
discrimination and vilification claims, identifying sections of the Act,
remedies sought, proofs of evidence and witness statements.
17. The next hearing of the matter was on 3 March 2006. At this
hearing, the Tribunal ordered the Respondent to provide a reply to the
Applicant’s claims by 17 March 2006 and for the Applicant to serve Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
the Respondent with any material in reply by 27 March 2006.
18. At the next hearing on 28 March 2006, the Tribunal ordered the
Respondent to provide material in reply to the Applicant’s particulars
by 7 April 2006, and the Tribunal ordered the Applicant to provide
any response to that by 21 April 2006. The Tribunal also granted
leave to the ACT Discrimination Commissioner, who is also the
Human Rights Commissioner1 to intervene in the proceedings,
pursuant to section 36 of the Human Rights Act 2004, which states:
“36 Human rights commissioner may intervene
(1) The human rights commissioner may intervene in a proceeding
1 Human Rights Act 2004, s.40 provides that the Discrimination Commissioner of
the ACT is the Human Rights Commissioner of the ACT.
before a court that involves the application of this Act with the leave
of the court.
(2) The court may give leave subject to conditions.”
19. The basis for the Commissioner to be joined to the proceedings
lay in the claims by the Respondent that the Commissioner had acted
outside her jurisdiction and the involvement of human rights in this
case. The Tribunal made orders that the Human Rights and
Discrimination Commissioner provide submissions by
1 May 2006.
20. At the next hearing on 5 May 2006, in accordance with requests
made by the Applicant, the matter was re-listed for hearing on
11 July 2006.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
21. The matter was given a final hearing on 11 July 2006.
Scope of the complaint
22. The facts in this case are not in dispute. The focus of any
inquiry must be the acts complained of, and any evidence must be
relevant to the complaint. The material and documents lodged with,
and submitted to, the Tribunal, constitute the factual matrix upon
which this decision is based (see, De Dominico v Marshall (unreported)
[2001] ACTSC 52).
23. The hearing before the Tribunal is a hearing de-novo (see, De
Dominico v Marshall (unreported) [2001] ACTSC 52), but based on the
original complaint made to the Human Rights and Discrimination
Commissioner. Although the Human Rights and Discrimination
Commissioner did not consider there was a case to be answered with
respect to the vilification aspect of the Applicant’s complaint, the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Tribunal’s enquiry includes vilification and discrimination.
24. This inquiry also examines issues raised by the Respondent
with respect to the jurisdiction of the Human Rights and
Discrimination Commissioner.
Submissions from the parties
25. In this matter, the Tribunal has received submissions from the
Applicant, the Respondent and the ACT Human Rights Commissioner.
Additional submissions on the issue of discrimination were sought by
the Tribunal and submitted by the parties. I will briefly set out the
main points from the submissions and the additional submissions.
The Applicant’s submission
26. In submissions to the Tribunal, the Applicant claims that
 he is homosexual (paragraph 2);
 he participated in the forum throughout 2005 (paragraph 5);
 the Respondent published grossly offensive posts (paragraph 5);
 the offensive posts occurred in the context of debate on the
rights of gay people (paragraph 7);
 he felt as if posts containing other types of prejudice weren’t
published with the frequency or degree of contempt as the “anti-
gay posts” (paragraph 9);
 by publishing these posts the Respondent discriminated against
him and treated him unfavourably (paragraph 11);
 he felt vilified by the posts that the Respondent published
(paragraph 11);
 he was frightened by the posts, he felt he was not respected by
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! the Canberra community or its main newspaper (paragraph 10);
 he felt angry that the Respondent “deemed it perfectly
acceptable for gay people to be publicly humiliated” and exposed
to hatred (paragraph 10);
 he thought that children and teenagers who might read the
forum could be adversely affected (paragraph 10);
 he felt that the published material could have the effect of
fuelling violence against lesbians and gay men (paragraph 10);
 he objected to the hateful language in the posts which ‘had no
purpose but to incite others to such hatred’ (paragraph 14);
 the unfavourable treatment to members of the gay and lesbian
community occurred due to the Respondent not living up to its
responsibility not to disseminate views likely to promote hatred
and violence (paragraph 11);
 it was the positive act of the Respondent in publishing anti-gay
views on its website, to a wide audience, that amounted to
unfavourable treatment and incitement to hatred (paragraph
11); Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
 the unfavourable treatment is the publishing of “extreme myths”
such as equating gay sex with bestiality and gay people to
criminals, paedophiles, to disease and to the mentally ill
(paragraph 14); and
 obligations to prevent vilification and discrimination (which the
Applicant claims the Respondent owes to the users of the forum)
are not incompatible with free speech (paragraph 14).
27. The remedy sought by the Applicant, in paragraph 15 of his
submission, is that the Respondent make a public apology to the gay
community for the material it has published which has incited hatred
and treated them unfavourably. The Applicant suggests that the
Canberra Times
“publish a full page apology, in a form of words to be agreed,
reviewing the facts of this case, noting that inciting hatred is an
unlawful act and one that produces substantial negative effects
on the targets of the language, noting that the messages they
published on their web site amounted to inciting hatred against
gay men and lesbians and amounting to treating them
unfavourably and apologising unreservedly for allowing such
material to be published.”
The Respondent’s submissions
28. The Respondent’s submission deals with two separate issues:
1. the Applicant’s claim of vilification; and
2. the Respondent’s claim that the Commissioner was acting
outside her jurisdiction.
29. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust The Respondent submits that it did not discriminate against the
Applicant in providing the service of on-line forum.
30. The Respondent admits to publishing the material complained
of and admits that this was a public act. However, in paragraph 66 of
its submission, the Respondent denies that its publication was about
people on the ground of sexuality.
31. Of course, the whole process occurred in the context of the then
current debate on civil marriages.
32. The Respondent rejected the allegations that the publication
incited hatred, serious contempt for or severe ridicule of, the Applicant
or other members of the group in question. It also stated, in the
alternative, that its conduct was protected by provisions within the
Discrimination Act. The Respondent contends that principles of free
political speech protect its actions. These claims are discussed
further in this decision. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
33. The Respondent also contends in its submission, that it
supports the rights of citizens to have and express opinions and that
it has a duty to allow people to express their views freely.
34. With regard to the other matter, which the Respondent put as
“the conduct of the Discrimination Commissioner”, the Respondent
claims that the Discrimination Commissioner misconceived the
functions given to her under the Act2 and has indicated that the
Tribunal could provide some guidance to the Commissioner with
respect to her duties and functions under the Act.
35. The Respondent claims that
2 Respondent’s submission, p. 17, paragraph [2].
 the Commissioner forwarded the Applicant’s complaint to the
Respondent without making any preliminary determination on
whether or not the complaint was within the jurisdiction of the
Discrimination Commissioner (page 17, paragraph 6); and
 the Discrimination Commissioner should have dismissed the
complaint as that was out of her jurisdiction.
36. Alternatively, the Respondent argues that the Discrimination
Commissioner should have dismissed the complaint under section 81
of the Discrimination Act. Section 81 requires the Discrimination
Commissioner to dismiss a complaint on the grounds such as that the
complaint is frivolous, vexatious, misconceived or lacking in
substance or was not made in good faith, or that the matter
complained of was not unlawful discrimination or vilification.3 The
+LILAustLIN AustLII AustLII Aust!
3
Section 81, Discrimination Act -
81 Declining complaints
(1) If, because of the investigation of a complaint lodged under section 72,
the commissioner decides that a relevant ground exists in relation to the
complaint, the commissioner must decline the complaint.
(2) For subsection (1), the following are relevant grounds:
(a) the complaint is frivolous, vexatious, misconceived or lacking in
substance or was not made in good faith;
(b) a more appropriate remedy in relation to the matter complained of
is reasonably available to the complainant;
(c) the complaint relates to an act, or the last in a series of acts, that
took place more than 12 months before the lodgment of the
complaint;
(d) the matter complained of is not unlawful under part 3, part 5 or
part 7 or section 66; Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
(e) the matter complained of has already been adequately dealt with by
the commissioner or tribunal;
(f) the matter complained of has already been adequately dealt with
otherwise than by the commissioner or tribunal;
(g) the complainant does not want the complaint investigated;
(h) having regard to the complaint and any other relevant matter before
the commissioner, in the opinion of the commissioner it is not
necessary to pursue the complaint.
(3) If the commissioner declines a complaint under subsection (1), the
commissioner must give written notice of the decision to the parties no
later than 60 days after the lodgment of the complaint.
(4) A notice to a complainant under subsection (3) must include a statement
to the effect that—
(a) if, within 60 days after the date of the notice, the complainant does
not require the commissioner to refer the complaint to the tribunal,
the commissioner will dismiss the complaint and take no further
action in relation to it; and
Respondent does not question the bona fides of the Applicant in
making the complaint anyway.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Must !!! Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
(b) should the complaint be so dismissed, the complainant may apply
to the tribunal for the complaint to be heard if exceptional
circumstances prevented him or her from requiring the referral.
The Human Rights Commissioner’s decision and submission
37. The submissions made by the Human Rights Commissioner set
out the legislative requirements and duties that require the
Commissioner to investigate complaints. The particular provisions
referred to by the Commissioner are reproduced in this decision under
the heading “PART 6 - THE COMMISSIONER’S ROLE TO
INVESTIGATE A COMPLAINT”.
38. The Commissioner contends that, on the basis of the function of
her office as provided in the Discrimination Act, the Respondent’s
claim with regard to her jurisdiction is entirely misconceived. In her
decision (conveyed to the parties on 25 October 2005), the ACT
Human Rights and Discrimination Commissioner advised that the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi complaint appeared to raise the issues of unlawful discrimination on
the ground of sexuality and that only a hearing of the Discrimination
Tribunal could establish whether or not the complaint is proved. In
regard to vilification, the Commissioner was of the view that some of
the postings were very contemptuous of homosexuals but did not
meet the high threshold required of the conduct to amount to
vilification (T-document 19).
39. The Commissioner discusses the way that the Human Rights Act
affects the interpretation of the Discrimination Act, and explains that
the restriction the relevant provisions of the Discrimination Act
(namely, sections 20(c) ((Goods, services and facilities) and section 66
(Unlawful vilification – race, sexuality etc)) place on the right to
freedom of expression is legitimate in terms of section 28 of the
Human Rights Act4 and Article 19(3) of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)5.
4 Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Section 28, Human Rights Act (as at 2005) -
“28 Human rights may be limited
Human rights may be subject only to reasonable limits set by Territory
laws that can be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society.”
5 Article 19(3), International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 1966 –
“Article 19
…………………………………
3. The exercise of the rights provided for in paragraph 2 of this article
carries with it special duties and responsibilities. It may therefore be
subject to certain restrictions, but these shall only be such as are
provided by law and are necessary:
(a) For respect of the rights or reputations of others;
Issues
40. The relevant issues for resolution in this matter are -
(1) whether any of the posts published in the forum amounted
to unlawful discrimination against the Applicant under the
Discrimination Act on the ground of his sexuality;
(2) whether any of the said posts were unlawful vilification of the
Applicant or a group of people, under section 66(1) of the
Discrimination Act on the ground of their characteristics of
sexuality; and
(3) if such posts amounted to unlawful vilification under
section 66(1) of the Discrimination Act, whether the
Respondent established the defence under section 66(2)(c) of
that Act.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
41. There is sufficient material before the Tribunal to decide on the
issue of vilification, but not the issue of discrimination. Therefore, the
Tribunal had invited the parties to make further submissions on the
issue of discrimination. Even though the further submissions were
received at the late stage of the proceedings, I will first deal with the
issue of discrimination as it is the primary focus of the Discrimination
Act.
42. In view of the submission made by the Respondent, I will also
be dealing with the jurisdiction of the Human Rights and
Discrimination Commissioner in relation to the Applicant’s complaint.
PART 2 - UNLAWFUL DISCRIM INATION
43. I will set out the relevant legislative provisions that apply to the
claim for discrimination in this matter.
Must!Il Aust!Il AustLI AustLi
Legislative scheme – discrimination
Objects of the Discrimination Act
44. The objects of the ACT are stated in section 4 as follows:
“(a) to eliminate, so far as possible, discrimination to which
this Act applies in the areas of work, education, access
to premises, the provision of goods, services, facilities
and accommodation and the activities of clubs; and
(b) For the protection of national security or of public order (ordre
public), or of public health or morals.”
(b) to eliminate, so far as possible, sexual harassment in
those areas; and
(c) to promote recognition and acceptance within the
community of the equality of men and women; and
(d) to promote recognition and acceptance within the
community of the principle of equality of opportunity for
all people.”
Relevant attribute
45. The Act applies to discrimination on the ground of any of the
several attributes specified in section 7(1), which inter alia includes
sexuality. There is no dispute that the Applicant has an attribute that
falls within the purview of section 7(1).
+LILAustLII \ustLII AustLII Aust!
Discrimination
46. Section 8 of the Act states what constitutes discrimination.
“8 What constitutes discrimination
(1) For this Act, a person discriminates against another
person if—
(a) the person treats or proposes to treat the other
person unfavourably because the other person has
an attribute referred to in section 7; or
(b) the person imposes or proposes to impose a
condition or requirement that has, or is likely to
have, the effect of disadvantaging people because
they have an attribute referred to in section 7.
(2) Subsection (1)(b) does not apply to a condition or Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
requirement that is reasonable in the circumstances.
(3) In deciding whether a condition or requirement is
reasonable in the circumstances, the matters to be taken
into account include—
(a) the nature and extent of the resultant disadvantage;
and
(b) the feasibility of overcoming or mitigating the
disadvantage; and
(c) whether the disadvantage is disproportionate to the
result sought by the person who imposes or
proposes to impose the condition or requirement.”
Discrimination in a relevant area
47. For conduct to be unlawful it must occur in a relevant area.
The Applicant’s allegations include that the Respondent discriminated
against him by reference to section 20 of the Act. Section 20
proscribes various forms of discrimination in the provision of goods,
services and facilities, stating:
“It is unlawful for a person (the provider) who (whether for
payment or not) provides goods or services, or makes
facilities available, to discriminate against another person—
(a) by refusing to provide those goods or services or
make those facilities available to the other person;
or
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi
(b) in the terms or conditions on which the provider
provides those goods or services or makes those
facilities available to the other person; or
(c) in the way in which the provider provides those
goods or services or makes those facilities available
to the other person.”
48. By providing the on-line forum, the Respondent provided a
service and facility within the meaning of section 20. [In the
circumstances of this case, the reference to “services” in relation to
section 20 includes “facilities”.) What is in dispute is whether the
manner in which services and facilities were provided amounted to
discrimination.
Allegation of discrimination – acts and omissions
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
49. The Applicant alleges that he was treated unfavourably by the
Respondent in two main ways.
First, by publishing extremely homophobic material on its
website, TCT committed discrimination. Secondly, TCT also
committed discrimination by failing to properly monitor and
control the posts it was publishing on its website and failing to
consider the effects such posts might have on the gay and
lesbian community. The conduct complained about here is thus
a mixture of positive acts and omissions (Applicant’s
submission, page 9).
50. In my reading of this complaint, it seems that the positive act of
publishing the material is constituted by the same act as any alleged
failure to properly monitor and control.
51. It is irrelevant, when applying the Discrimination Act to this
scenario, to inquire whether the acts complained of are positive acts
or whether they are omissions. This is because section 4A(1) of the
Act provides that doing an act includes failing to do an act. This
means that the conduct or proposed conduct and the imposition or
proposed imposition of a condition may be constituted by a failure to
undertake conduct or a failure to impose a condition.
52. In Lewin v ACT Health & Community Care Service
[2002] ACDT 2, the omission to prevent the complainant’s exposure to
the perfume to which she was allergic was taken to be unfavourable
treatment. Deputy President of the Discrimination Tribunal,
M H Peedom, said that (at paragraph 49),
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! “The failure by the respondent to take steps at the
complainant's request which avoided the risk of harm to the
complainant by her exposure to perfume, having regard to the
undisputed nature of her condition, was clearly an adverse
outcome for the complainant. She was, in that event, treated
unfavourably by the respondent.”
53. Any failure by a person to consider the effects of their behaviour
on others, including a relevant class of persons for the purposes of the
Act, may assist this inquiry – particularly in respect of establishing
the causal connection between the act and the relevant attribute.
However, this not a separate cause of action for the Tribunal to
determine.
Direct/indirect discrimination
54. Under section 8(1)(a) of the Act, discrimination is conduct that Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
treats another person unfavourably because of that person’s relevant
attribute. This has been accepted as “direct” discrimination. It is not
relevant consideration that the conduct complained of is reasonable.
55. Section 8(1)(b) refers to indirect discrimination, which is
“imposing or proposing to impose a condition that has, or is likely to
have, the effect of disadvantaging people because they have an
attribute referred to in section 7”. Section 8(2) provides for the
distinction between direct and indirect discrimination in that it will
not be indirect discrimination if the condition or requirement is
reasonable in the circumstances.
56. The Applicant’s claim is of direct discrimination. To determine
whether conduct is discriminatory under this first limb of section 8,
the considerations this Tribunal must make are whether there was
unfavourable treatment of the Applicant by the Respondent and
whether the necessary causal link between the alleged acts or
omissions by the Respondent and the relevant attribute of the
Applicant is established. That is, whether the Respondent treated or
proposed to treat the Applicant in any way because of the Applicant’s
attribute.
57. “It is necessary,….,to seek out the true basis of the
respondent’s conduct insofar as it may be found to constitute
unfavourable treatment. It is unnecessary, however, to establish that
the conduct complained of was intended or motivated by a
discriminatory attitude (Edgley v Federal Capital Press of Australia Pty
Ltd).” (see, Harrison v ACT Housing [2002] ACTDT 3
(paragraph 37).)
Unfavourable treatment
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Xusti
58. To constitute “direct” discrimination under section 8(1)(a), there
must be unfavourable treatment or proposed unfavourable treatment
directed toward, or aimed at, a person because of a relevant attribute.
What is relevant under section 8(1)(a) is the Respondent’s reason for
doing an act, not its causative effect.
59. When identifying unfavourable treatment in the ACT, it is not
necessary to make comparison between the treatment complained of
and the experience of those without a relevant attribute. In Harrison v
ACT Housing [2002] ACTDT 3 at 35, the Tribunal stated:
“[u]nlike other anti-discrimination legislation in Australia which
involves differentiation or distinction in the consequences of the
impugned treatment as between persons with different
characteristics or attributes, discrimination under section 8 of
the Discrimination Act is constituted by conduct which treats
another person unfavourable (see, Edgley v Federal Capital Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Press of Australia Pty Ltd [1999] ACTSC 95 (1 October 1999)].”
60. This Tribunal must inquire into whether the consequences of
publishing the posts complained of are favourable to the Applicant’s
interests or are adverse to the Applicant’s interests, and whether the
dealing has occurred because of the Applicant’s attribute (see,
Johnston v Dallarooma Pty Ltd [1999] ACTDT 8 at 20 referring to Re
Prezzi and Discrimination Commissioner and Quest Group Pty Ltd
(1996) 39 ALD 729 at 736).
61. The Discrimination Commissioner considered many of the
postings as very contemptuous of homosexuals. In a letter to the
parties that summarised the Commissioner’s findings, in referring to
five extracts from the posts submitted as evidence, the Commissioner
stated:
“ specific comments outlined above contain specific abuse
and contempt of homosexuals, and go beyond the mere
statement of opinion. For example the use of the terms
“pervert”, “slimy, smelly specimens”, and “pathogens” in
extract 1 above you allege are made in relation to homosexuals,
indicate a view that homosexuals are lower forms of human
lives. Also extract 4 equates the provision of information about
homosexuality to defecation, specifically it states, this
information “defecate(s) over our children’s opportunity to grow
up free of their piteous influence”, and refers to this information
as “repulsive”. The comment in this posting that homosexuals
“cannot naturally have children….stay away from mine” also
appears ridiculing and condescending. Extract 5 does not
attempt to be providing any particular opinion of use to any
public debate, but appears to be gratuitously insulting. The
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! comments in extract 5 “infant losers” and “dropkicks” and other
comments in this extract posted the same day as extract 4, also
appear to relate to homosexuals (see, page 6, T-document 19).”
62. In terms of whether this was unfavourable treatment, the
Applicant states:
‘On the facts, there is little doubt that having highly offensive
posts directly attacking homosexuality repeatedly posted on the
HYS forum clearly constitutes “unfavourable” treatment of gay
and lesbian users of the forum. As a gay man and a user of the
forum the complainant was undeniably treated “unfavourably”
as per s 8(1)(a).’
63. The Applicant states that he felt he was treated unfavourably
and that he felt he was discriminated against. It is evident that his
position is that the act of discrimination against him was publication
of the allegedly offensive posts and the harm suffered was initially fear Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
and then a feeling that he was not respected.
64. In his witness statement to the Tribunal, the Applicant states:
“These posts initially frightened me. I am a decent and hard-
working member of the Canberra community and these posts
left me feeling that I wasn’t respected by the community or its
main newspaper…” (paragraph 10).
“Not only did I feel vilified by these posts and concerned that
they might incite others to homophobia, I also felt that TCT was
discriminating against me and treating me unfavourably….As a
reputable media outlet promoting responsible debate based on
fact, TCT has a responsibility not to disseminate views likely to
promote hatred and violence....” (paragraph 11).
“Obligations to prevent vilification and discrimination are not
incompatible with free speech. I have never objected to any of
the substantive opinions expressed in the posts to the HYS
forum. I have objected to the hateful language which had no
purpose but to incite others to such hatred. I have objected to
the extreme myths published by TCT (equating gay sex with
bestiality and gay people to criminals, paedophiles, to disease
and to the mentally ill) which amount per se to unfavourable
treatment….” (paragraph 14)
65. The Applicant submits ‘that the offensive posts complained of
are not those which merely presented anti-gay view points nor those
which weighed into constructive debates on issues such as gay
marriage or gay rights. The posts being complained of are those
which sought to accuse homosexuals of being (amongst-other-things)
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! “pervert infiltrators of institutions” and the posts that equated
homosexuality to bestiality and paedophilia. These posts sought to
degrade other users of TCT’s online forum and their opinions on the
basis of their presumed homosexuality.’6
66. In his further submission, the Applicant specifically argues that
vilifying and harassing nature of the posts contributed to the
environment of harmful abuse, “where it was impossible for gay and
lesbian people feel respected” and participate in the debate. The
Applicant claims that he felt that he was excluded from the debate
and gave up trying to participate in it. The Applicant submits that
this exclusion from the provision of services (that is, the on-line
forum), was unfavourable treatment of him under the Discrimination
Act.
Causal connection
67. The unfavourable treatment must occur because of a relevant Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
attribute. However, section 4A(2) provides a qualification on
interpreting section 8(1)(a), in that the role of the “attribute” need not
have been the sole or even the dominant reason for the treatment
complained of.
68. Any unfavourable treatment that results from an act does not
have to be the intentional result of that act. In ACT Department of
Education & Training v Prendergast [2000] ACTDT 6, in reference to Re
Prezzi and the Discrimination Commissioner, the Tribunal stated:
“It was sufficient that the person taking the action knew about
the impairment suffered by the person affected by the action.
Moreover, it is not necessary to show that the person
6 Applicant’s Legal Submission, p.10.
discriminated has been treated differently from a person without
the relevant attribute. It is sufficient that the consequence of
the action on that person is unfavourable because of the
impairment.”
69. The Applicant must establish a causal nexus between the
treatment by the Respondent and the relevant attribute of the
Applicant. This causal nexus is the “reason” not the “motive” for
doing an act and these two concepts must be distinguished. This is
supported in ACT Department of Education & Training v Predergast,
where the Tribunal stated, citing Clayton Eric v Australia Post [1999]
VCAT 65:
“In Clayton Eric v Australia Post (footnote omitted), Deputy
President Wolters discussed the development of the relevant
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! case law in accepting unconsciously applied factors that may
trigger unconscious discrimination. He found that, ‘[s]uch
unconscious application of relevant factors allows a tribunal of
fact, given the appropriate causal relationship between the
alleged discriminatory act and the ultimate act constituting the
illegal discrimination, to draw conclusions as to the ground or
reason that may have motivated the alleged discriminator.”
70. Benevolent motivation does not preclude an act from
constituting discrimination (see, Purvis v NSW (Department of
Education and Training) [2003] HCA 62) and, in relation to this point
of law, the Applicant submitted that it is irrelevant if the Editor had a
benevolent motive (such as promoting community debate) in his
actions. Motivation must be distinguished from “real reason”.
71. The Applicant referred to an editorial comment published in The
Canberra Times purportedly on 24 September 2005 (T-document 10)
to support the contention that the Respondent was aware of the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
attribute of homosexuality in some of its forum users. That editorial
included the following:
“[t]here can be no doubt that some HYS letters did say some
things which annoyed not only homosexuals but ordinary
decent and tolerant Australians who have no truck with
homophobia. Indeed a good many HYS forum users rejected
such views in no uncertain terms.....
Indeed, even under my liberal regime, a number of letters on
both sides seemed to cross the line of proper, if willing,
discourse, and were not posted.”
72. One issue here is whether the Respondent knew the Applicant
was a homosexual and, therefore, a person with a relevant attribute
under the Act. However, it is the Applicant’s contention that it is not
necessary that the Respondent actually knew the Applicant possessed
the relevant attribute of homosexuality and the Respondent knew
some of the forum users would have this attribute.
73. The Applicant claims that, as was the case in Prendergast, the
absence of specific knowledge of the complainant’s attribute is no
defence for the Respondent. In other words, that it is sufficient if the
Respondent knew that some of the forum users would have this
attribute. Notwithstanding this contention, the Respondent was
formally notified that the Applicant was a homosexual on
14 September 2005 (T-document 7) and some of the allegedly offensive
homophobic comments were posted on the forum as late as 17 and
18 October 2005 (T-document 16).
74. The Applicant also argues that the Respondent took the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! sexuality of the forum users into consideration. This raises the
question of whether the acts of the Respondent were advertent to the
Applicant’s sexuality. The Applicant further states that the
Respondent “was aware of the presence of homosexual forum users
who were offended by the homophobic material published by the
TCT”, and “[]indeed the complainant himself protested in the HYS
forum about the homophobia being expressed”.7
75. The unfavourable treatment the Applicant alleges consisted of
the positive act of the Respondent publishing to a wider audience the
views that were likely to promote hatred towards the members of the
gay and lesbian community.8
Discrimination in providing services
76. The unlawfulness the Applicant complains about is that stated
in section 20(c) of the Discrimination Act. That is, that the Respondent
discriminated against the Applicant and other members of the gay and Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
lesbian community in the way it provided services, namely, the on line
forum.
77. I do not believe providing such a service to the community in
general, albeit with offensive elements published in it being directed at
homosexuality, could amount to discrimination of the Applicant. To
constitute discrimination, an act should be directed against an
individual because of the individual’s attribute.
78. In paragraphs 64 and 66 above, I referred to the Applicant’s
argument in his further submission that the environment created by
the posts in the on-line forum prevented him from participating in the
debate, and that this was direct discrimination under section 20(c) of
7 Applicant’s Legal Submissions, p.14.
8 Applicant’s witness statement, paragraph [11].
the Discrimination Act, namely, unfavourable treatment in the way in
which the Respondent provided the on-line forum services.
79. In particular, the Applicant states any member of society must
have opportunity to participate in such a forum, on a fully equal basis
with all other members of society, and that the Respondent not
ensuring this amounted to unfavourable treatment. It is evident that
the Applicant’s claim is that such a denial arose from the
Respondent’s act of publishing the posts offensive of homosexuals and
omitting to preclude their publication.
80. The Applicant also alleges that “it can be inferred that the
Canberra Times either knew, or ought to have known, that that the
material it allowed to be published in the Forum was false, harmful
and had been held by Tribunals in other jurisdictions to amount to
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! vilification (particularly statements equating homosexuality with
bestiality and paedophilia)” and that “(knowing or reckless)
publication of such false and harmful material is in and of itself
unfavourable treatment.” Therefore, the Applicant’s position is that “it
is impossible to address” his claim of discrimination “in isolation
from” the vilification claim.
81. This explains why the Applicant’s arguments in relation to
discrimination and vilification were not clearly delineated. However,
I must say that submissions from all parties were such that this
Tribunal did not have difficulty in examining the issues separately. As
has been the practice in relation to anti-discrimination matters, I have
also given the highest in favour of the evidence presented by the
Applicant in relation to the claim for discrimination (see, Michael
Firestone v Australian National University [2009] ACTDT 1 at [24] and
[25])
Respondent’s submission on discrimination Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
82. The Respondent, in its further submission, denies
discrimination against the Applicant and, under protest, states that “it
is not at all clear….that any act of discrimination was specifically
alleged”. It submits that the question in relation to publication on a
website “is not whether the complainant is capable of feeling
discriminated against (the effect) but whether there was an act which
treated the applicant differently because of his sexuality (the cause)”.
83. The Respondent claims that it “effectively treated everyone the
same, not that it treated people in the class of the complainant
differently from others”. The Respondent also addressed the issue of
failing to extend the censorship to matters involving sexuality and
submits that “the grounds of the censorship, or the reasons for the act
of censorship, are not focused in any way for the purpose of
discriminating in any manner for or against homosexuality”.
84. With regard to consideration of unlawful discrimination in
providing goods, services and facilities under section 20, the
Respondent’s position is that “[t]he notion of different, or unequal,
treatment is fundamental”.
Different treatment
85. In essence, the Respondent’s position is that the Applicant was
treated no different to any other people. As I said in paragraph 59
above, when identifying unfavourable treatment in the ACT, it is not
necessary to make comparison between the treatment complained of
and the experience of those without the relevant attribute [Harrison v
ACT Housing].
86. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Austi However, as I noted in paragraph 52 above, in Lewin V ACT
Health & Community Care Service, the respondent's failure to treat the
complainant differently amounted to unlawful treatment in providing
services.
87. About direct discrimination under section 8(1)(a) of the
Discrimination Act, Beaumont ACJ said (at paragraph 55) in Edgely v
Federal Capital Press of Australia Pty Ltd (Federal Court of Australia),
that it “is directed at adverse behaviour towards a person, because of
an attribute. I emphasise that the conduct must be aimed at, or
towards, the person complaining of discrimination”.
88. Unfavourable treatment of the complainant in Lewin’s was the
respondent not treating the complainant, in the circumstances,
differently from others in view of her impairment and not requiring
others to accommodate the complainant to avoid the risk of harm to
her. The conduct, therefore, was adverse conduct towards the
complainant. This unfavourable treatment had an adverse “effect” on Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
the complainant.
89. As the Respondent argues that it is the cause of conduct that
will mark out unlawful discrimination. Any adverse effect will be the
consequence of such conduct. In other words whether the cause,
which was true reason for the alleged conduct, was the attribute of
the Applicant. It would be so, if the conduct was “aimed at, or
towards, the person complaining of discrimination”.
90. Important considerations are
 whether the Applicant was treated in the same way as other
forum users, that is, whether he was not treated differently from
others; and
 if so, whether that amounted to conduct adverse towards him.
91. It is clear from the submissions received by the Tribunal that
the parties agree that the Applicant was not treated differently in view
of his sexuality by the Respondent’s conduct of publishing posts in
the forum. Should the Applicant be treated differently so that some of
the posts, in particular, those which the Discrimination Commissioner
considered as insulting or ridiculing, should not have been published?
In other words, should the Respondent have applied a rigorous
censoring of the material to avoid publishing those posts?
92. I have to consider the issues within the parameters of the
Discrimination Act, not in accordance with laws relating to censorship
or defamation.
On-line forum environment
93. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! The adverse effect the Applicant alleges was the feelings that he
had when he read the posts, namely that he was frightened, that he
felt angry, that he felt that the posts could have the effect of fuelling
hatred against lesbians, and that he felt that he was not respected by
the Canberra community or its main newspaper. Hurtful feelings of
an individual cannot themselves make the relevant conduct, as here,
the way services were provided, to amount to discrimination.
94. I find that what the Applicant endeavours to impress on the
Tribunal is that because of the strong feelings he had by reading the
“offensive” posts against homosexuality, he was prevented from
continuing to participate in the forum.
95. It is expected that a passionate debate about a contemporary
and controversial subject is likely to generate comments amounting to
be offensive or hurtful to one section of the readers and they may view
those comments with strong feelings. In the circumstances of this
case, this applies. Whether or not to continue to participate in the AustLI AustLI AustLI AustLi
forum was a matter of choice for the Applicant. I do not find that he
was prevented from participating in the forum by the act or omission
of the Respondent. I find that no act or omission advertent to the
Applicant’s sexuality was involved in the way the Respondent provided
the forum. This was so even though the Respondent seemed to have
become aware of the grievance of the Applicant. The true reason for
the publication of the alleged posts was not the Applicant’s sexuality.
96. Certainly, the remarks in the posts such as those noted by the
Human Rights and Discrimination Commissioner (such as, “pervert”,
“slimy, smelly specimens”, and “pathogens”) (see, paragraph 61
above) were offensive to homosexuals. I consider that the Respondent
should have taken care in deciding whether or not to publish them,
particularly when the Respondent as a responsible media entity
should have known that a number of its readers who have respect for
it would be deeply offended by the offensiveness (amounting to hatred,
contempt or ridicule) emerging from the remarks. However, the
alleged posts cannot be said to be advertent to, or aimed at, the
Applicant because of his attribute.
97. In the way the Respondent provided the service, I do not believe
it should make special efforts to make any person or group of persons
to feel welcome to participate in the forum. In other words, I do not
accept that the Respondent should have treated the Applicant
differently to any other participants in the forum. If I may make a
comparison with a sport, for example, a game of football - a willing
player cannot be heard to say that he or she was prevented from
taking part because of the force and speed, which sometimes may
amount to roughness, displayed by other players. Nevertheless, the
referee should keep the game under supervision and control to ensure
that the players’ conduct is kept within the game’s rule and does not
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! become unruly.
98. In a debate sponsored by it, the Respondent has a responsible
supervisory role to check that published views do not exceed
acceptable levels of standard expected of the forum by its readers, who
may come from different sections of the Canberra community. I would
expect the Respondent to be sensitive to this role, where the
expressions in the debate have the potential to give rise to strong
emotions from sections of the community.
99. In his article in the Canberra Times (T-document 10), the editor
of the forum stated that his understanding about publishing the posts
in the forum was providing a platform for expressing views for and
against laws relating to homosexuality so far as they did not amount
to preaching violence towards or persecution of homosexuals or to
discriminating against homosexuals in providing goods and services
or making available facilities.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
100. This statement, I note, expresses the policy relating to
publishing in the forum. It is evident that the Respondent was aware
of the requirement not to breach the law of discrimination. It is also
evident that the true reason for the Respondent’s conduct was not
treating the Applicant unfavourably because of his sexuality.
101. In the same article, the editor states that his “impulse was to let
debates run, even with an amount of personal abuse (particularly if
the original correspondent himself or herself showed the capacity to
dole it out), subject to fairly bullish view of the law of defamation”.
Discrimination - finding
102. I find that the Applicant was hurt in his feelings by the type of
posts that appeared in the forum and chose not to seek the services of
the forum. However, I am not satisfied that he was subjected to
discrimination in the provision of services by the Respondent. It is
evident from the material before me that the Respondent expected a
robust debate on the issue of homosexuality in the context of the
strong public interest in the Government proposal to recognise same
sex marriages and had not acted advertently to the Applicant’s
sexuality in publishing the alleged posts.
103. In making this finding, I applied the objective test of
discrimination (see, Almassey and Omari and ACT Multicultural
Council Inc [2008] ACTDT 2 (at paragraph 24).
104. As I said in my recent decision in Michael Firestone v Australian
National University [at paragraph 177]
“It is not always easy to prove discrimination on the ground
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! of disability within the meaning of the Act to the
“reasonable satisfaction” of this Tribunal, in particular, with
the requirement to establish the causal link between the
alleged act or omission and the disability. While it is very
difficult to know the intention or motive of a person who is
alleged to have unlawfully discriminated against another,
the Tribunal has the responsibility to find the true reason
principally on the basis of the objectively ascertainable
evidence presented to it.”
105. I agree with the Discrimination Commissioner’s submission
about the need to not interpreting the anti-discrimination legislation
narrowly (I W v City of Perth (1997) 191 CLR 1 at 11-12 per
Brennan CJ and McHugh J) and “the appropriateness of construing
human rights legislation so as to achieve the statutory purpose”.
Discrimination Commissioner’s views on discrimination and
human rights Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
106. In her submission on discrimination, the Discrimination
Commissioner mirrors the submission made by the Applicant, in that
she states that “[t]he failure to edit the published material and the
grossly offensive nature of the material, render the provision of the
web site service discriminatory in that Mr Emlyn Jones was, as a
member of a class, the subject of discriminatory abuse”.
107. The Discrimination Commissioner submits that
 the Discrimination Act, so far as it is possible to do so
with its purpose, must be interpreted in way that is
compatible with human rights (see, section 30, Human
Rights Act 2004);
 the freedom of expression enshrined in section 16 of the
Human Rights Act is not an unlimited right and may be
subject to some restrictions, such as for the respect of
the rights and reputations of others; and
 Section 28 of the Human Rights Act provides that
“Human Rights may be subject only to reasonable limits
set by Territory laws that can be demonstrably justified
in a free and democratic society”.
108. The Commissioner’s first submission (dated 1 May 2006) with
regard to limits to freedom of expression was focused more in relation
to the topic of vilification rather than discrimination. However,
I appreciate the relevance of that submission in relation to preventing
both discrimination of the Applicant or vilification.
109. The Commissioner’s further submission refers to section 8 of
the Human Rights Act, which enshrines the rights to enjoy human
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! rights without discrimination of any kind, to equal protection of the
law without discrimination, and to equal and effective protection
against discrimination on any ground.
110. In her decision of 25 October 2005 (T-document 19) (at page 8),
the ACT Human Rights and Discrimination Commissioner applied this
right to the Discrimination Act and considered that discrimination on
the ground of sexuality should be widely interpreted and includes act
of omission as well as facilitating others to discriminate. She also
submits that “Not only was the complainant subjected to an
unfavourably hostile environment when seeking to access the
respondent’s service, but arguably his privacy was violated by an
unlawful attack on his reputation under s.12 of the Human Rights
Act 2004.”
111. It appears that the Commissioner was of the view that the
Applicant suffered detriment because the posts that the Applicant
alleged to be vilifying of homosexuals was of the grossly offensive Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
nature, created a hostile environment to the Applicant when seeking
the service of the forum, and was therefore, discriminatory against the
Applicant in relation to the Respondent’s provision of the services.
112. The Discrimination Commissioner’s submission provides useful
information on the indignity and prejudice that gays and lesbians
experience in the society, and states that a person’s right to dignity “is
inevitably violated by entering a public domain such as a community
discussion forum and being confronted without warning by material
that denigrates their sexuality, an integral and possibly defining
feature of their being”.
113. I note the substance in this argument is that manner in which
the Respondent provided services in the forum exposed the Applicant
to the infringement of his human rights and hence, discriminatory. At
the same time, I am conscious of the right of the Respondent to
conduct its affairs within the bounds of the Discrimination Act. I note
from the article published in the Canberra Times (T-document 10)
that the debates in the forum were to accommodate sincere views on
issues even with an amount of personal abuse to the extent that they
did not breach laws relating to defamation and discrimination.
114. Competing rights can operate only with appropriate limitations
in relation to them, consistent with section 28 of the Human Rights
Act. The right to freedom of expression and the right to not to be
discriminated against will have their respective limits in relation to the
operation of both rights. In other words, the right to freedom of
expression should not amount to abuse resulting in discrimination or
vilification of a person, and the right not to discriminate should not
stifle the freedom of expression. I agree that unlawful discrimination
under section 20(c) can place undue restriction on a person’s right to
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! freedom of expression. In my view, the pre-condition for applying that
restriction is the finding about the existence of such unlawful
discrimination.
115. While being conscious of interpreting the Discrimination Act,
consistently with its objectives and not narrowly, I had had regard to
the rights of the Applicant, including his right to reputation and right
to not to be discriminated against, and also the right of the
Respondent (and derivatively the right of the participants of the forum)
to freedom of expression.
116. The Almassey’s case involved discrimination of the complainant
under section 20(c) of the Discrimination Act. In that case, I held that
the respondent’s words and conduct amounted to discrimination of
the complainant because of her attribute (that is, mental instability). I
took the view that the use of words was part of the “way in which the
provider…provides …goods or services or facilities”. Even though that
case did not discuss human rights, it is clear that the decision Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
supported restriction on the right to freedom of expression in the face
of discriminatory words.
117. Both Almassey’s and Lewin’s involved discrimination under
section 20(c) of the Discrimination Act, and the discriminatory conduct
occurred in the presence of the complainants. On the other hand, in
the present matter, the way in which the Respondent provided
services did not occur in the presence of the Applicant. Therefore,
proving that the alleged posts were unfavourable treatment of the
Applicant because of his sexuality is not as straightforward as in the
above cases. In this case, the Respondent did not know the Applicant,
and the Applicant disclosing his identity to the Respondent later does
not affect the issue of discrimination under examination.
Need to address legal issues
118. While applying the Discrimination Act, consistently with its
objectives and human rights, the Tribunal will also need to address
the relevant legal issues that the Applicant needs to establish, such
the onus of proof and causative link between the Respondent’s act or
omission and the unfavourable treatment on the ground of the
Applicant’s sexuality.
119. If the ‘true reason’ for the discriminatory act or omission was
the Applicant’s sexuality, any consequent infringement of his human
rights would make that act or omission more serious than otherwise
would be the case. Nonetheless, as I found in paragraph 100 above,
the ‘true reason’ for the Respondent’s act or omission relating to the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! posts in the forum was not the Applicant’s sexuality. Nevertheless,
I acknowledge reluctantly that an offensive act or omission which is
not discriminatory within the meaning of the Discrimination Act may
still be capable of infringing certain human rights of complainants to
some extent.
120. The scheme under the Discrimination Act does not envisage an
applicant to claim discrimination as a member of a class to which he
or she belongs. A person has a standing in relation to a
discrimination claim only in relation to discrimination of him or her as
an individual. Section 72 of the Discrimination Act provides a
complaint in relation to unlawful discrimination may be made by a
person aggrieved by the act or by an agent acting on behalf of 1 or
more aggrieved persons with their written authorisation. The
Applicant in this matter is not an agent of any other aggrieved
persons.
121. As I said before in this decision, unlawful discrimination within Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
the parameters of the Discrimination Act requires the Applicant to
prove to this Tribunal’s reasonable satisfaction that the Respondent’s
act or omission in the way of providing services was advertent to the
Applicant’s attribute.
122. Offensive posts, contemptuous of homosexuals, cannot by
themselves amount to discrimination of the Applicant, irrespective of
whether or not they may amount to vilification.
123. I am satisfied that the Applicant wanted to engage in a wide-
ranging debate on the issue of homosexuality at the time that topic
drew considerable attention from the society due to proposals to
legislate for same sex marriages.
124. I had the benefit of perusing an extract of a number of posts
from the forum that the Respondent provided to this Tribunal. I find
that the posts were full of colloquial terms and expressed various
views for and against homosexuals and homosexuality. When I look
at the totality of those posts, including those which are abusive of
homosexuality and those vehemently responding to the Applicant’s
posts, I am unable to conclude that a reasonable person in the
position of the Applicant would have been forced not to participate in
the debate if he or she wanted to.
Nature of the posts in the forum
125. Even though I have concluded that the alleged posts were not
discriminatory of the Applicant, I would like to express the following
views.
126. As members of a civilised society generally and in particular, as
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! a society in Canberra, which has a high level of living standards and
literacy rate, it should not be in our culture to cause indignity to, or
hurt the feelings of, our fellow humans, intentionally or
unintentionally, or to act in a way that cause them fear of their rights
being infringed. The Respondent has a social and moral obligation to
ensure that publication in a community forum which it caters to all
people equally should be conscientiously controlled in a way that does
not seriously offend a reasonable person with a particular attribute.
Such a threshold would ensure it to avoid any risk of a breach of law.
127. It is also not appropriate for a well respected media entity to
assert the freedom of expression without the corresponding
responsibility to ensure that that freedom is not used as a vehicle for
offensive and contemptuous remarks that are capable of hurting the
feelings of people with certain attributes set out in the Discrimination
Act. My strong recommendation to the Respondent on this matter is
set out later in this decision.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
128. Anyone in the position of the Respondent should have a
repeated warning to readers that the forum may include robust
emotional debate and contain material that may be offensive to some
readers.
129. I will now turn to the Applicant’s claim that he was vilified by
the posts published in the forum.
PART 3 - VILIFICATION
Legislative scheme – vilification
130. Part 6 of the Discrimination Act deals with racial, sexuality and
HIV/AIDS vilification. There are two levels of vilification provided for
in the Act, namely, unlawful vilification and serious vilification.
131. The Applicant’s allegations are for unlawful vilification.
Section 66, which provides for unlawful vilification, is as follows:
“66 Unlawful vilification—race, sexuality etc
(1) It is unlawful for a person, by a public act, to incite hatred
towards, serious contempt for, or severe ridicule of, a person
or group of people on the ground of any of the following
characteristics of the person or members of the group:
(a) race;
(b) sexuality;
(c) transsexuality;
(d) HIV/AIDS status.
(2) This section does not make unlawful—
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! (a) a fair report of an act mentioned in subsection (1); or
(b) a communication or the distribution or dissemination of
any matter consisting of a publication that is subject to
a defence of absolute privilege in a proceeding for
defamation; or
(c) a public act, done reasonably and honestly, for
academic, artistic, scientific or research purposes or for
other purposes in the public interest, including
discussion or debate about and presentations of any
matter.”
Elements of unlawful vilification
132. Four elements must be satisfied in order for the allegation of
vilification under section 66(1) to be proven. These are:
1. there must be a ‘public act’ carried out by a ‘person’; Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
2. the act must amount to incitement;
3. the effect of the act of incitement must be to incite hatred
towards, serious contempt for, or severe ridicule of, the
Applicant; and
4. the incitement must be on the ground of the characteristics
listed in section 66(1).
I will now examine these elements.
(1). Public act carried out by a person
133. Section 65 of the Act provides a non-exhaustive definition of a
public act, which includes, inter alia, the distribution or
dissemination of any matter to the public.
134. Although the Respondent admits that it engaged in a public
act,9 the Respondent proposed that the public act was the provision of
the internet site and the broad act of publishing a host of letters. It is
the Tribunal’s position that the public act was the specific act of
posting of individual messages, including the decision of edit and
deletion of messages, onto the forum.
135. In relation to section 18C(2) of the Racial Discrimination
Act 1975 (Cth), which made racial vilification unlawful by an act,
otherwise than in private, Branson J (Federal Court of Australia) said
in Jones v Toben [2002] FCA 1150 (at paragraphs [73] and [75]) that,
”the placing of material, whether text, graphics, audio or video, on a
website which is not password protected is an act which causes
words, sounds, images or writing to be communicated to the public in
the sense that they are communicated to any person who utilises a
[AustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! browser to gain access to that website” and that the act of placing
them “on a website which is not password protected is an act of
publication”.
136. The Respondent admits to being a person within the meaning of
the Act, but proposed that it was the editor of the site that was the
tLI relevant person that carried out the public act. It is the Tribunal’s
position that the Respondent is the Federal Capital Press, not its
individual employee.
(2). Act amounts to incitement
137. The second element in the test of incitement under section 66 is
to ask whether the public act amounted to incitement.
138. In Sunol v Collier (EOD) [2006] NSWADTAP 51, the NSW
Administrative Decisions Tribunal, Appeal Panel, discussed
homosexuality vilification in terms of section 49ZT of the Anti- Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Discrimination Act 1977 (NSW), which requires that there be:
1. a public act
2. which incites
3. hatred towards, serious contempt for, or severe ridicule
of, a person or group of persons
4. on the ground of the homosexuality of the person or
members of that group.
139. The similarity between the elements required to prove
vilification in NSW and in ACT means that the Tribunal’s construction
of “incite” in Sunol v Collier, set out below, is directly relevant to the
construction of “incite” for the purposes of section 66.
9 Respondent’s submission, paragraph [17].
“9 …………. As this ground of appeal concerns the construction
of s 49ZT of the AD Act it may be properly characterised as an
appeal on a question of law. In its decision the Tribunal referred
to the summary of the law given in an earlier homosexual
vilification case, Burns v Dye [2002] NSWADT 32 at [19]- [23].
In Burns the Tribunal set out the principles which could be
drawn from numerous earlier cases concerning the racial
vilification provisions in the Act. As similar language has been
used in all of those parts of the AD Act which render it unlawful
to engage in public acts of vilification on various grounds, this
approach to the proper construction of s 49ZT was clearly
correct.
10 The summary of the law provided in Burns and relied upon
by the Tribunal in this case was accurate. It is supported by
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! ample authority. In Veloskey v Karagiannakis [2002]
NSWADTAP 18 at [25]- [26] the Appeal Panel stated:
[25] Nor is it necessary that the complainant prove that a
person or persons were actually incited by the public act
to respond in a requisite manner. That much has never
been doubted, although evidence that the public act has
had an actual effect may be relevant, both on the question
of the public act to incite, and on the question of
damages.
[26] In determining whether the public act is capable, in
an objective sense, of inciting others to feel hatred
towards or serious contempt for, or severe ridicule of a
person or persons on the ground of race, the approach
taken to the characterisation of the audience for these
purposes is crucial. Analogies have been drawn with
defamation law and with media law… Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
11 A similar approach has been taken to the interpretation of
the incitement to racial hatred provisions in Part IIA of the
Racial Discrimination Act 1975 (Cth). There are significant
differences between the vilification provisions in the NSW Act
and the racial hatred provisions in the Commonwealth Act. The
most notable is the perspective from which the impact of the
conduct in question is assessed. However, both bodies of law
require that the impact of public conduct be ascertained in
order to determine whether it is unlawful. The approach which
has been taken by the federal courts to assessing the impact of
conduct in incitement to racial hatred cases is well illustrated
by statements made by Drummond J in Hagan v Trustees of the
Toowoomba Sports Ground Trust [2001] FCA 1615 at [15]:
It is apparent from the wording of s 18C(1)(a) [of the
Racial Discrimination Act 1975] that whether an act
contravenes the section is not governed by the impact the
act is subjectively perceived to have by a complainant. An
objective test must be applied in determining whether the
act complained of has the necessary offensive, insulting,
humiliating or intimidatory quality for it to be within the
sub-section.
12 The decision in this case was upheld by the Full Court of the
Federal Court in Hagan v Trustees of the Toowoomba Sports
Ground Trust [2001] FCA 123; (2001) 105 FCR 56.
13 No arguments have been advanced which persuade us that
the earlier authorities dealing with the proper construction of
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! the various vilification provisions in the Act were incorrectly
decided. Consequently, there is no merit in the first appeal
ground that the Tribunal misconstrued s 49ZT(1) of the AD Act
when it held that the provision requires an objective assessment
of the capacity of the public act to incite the requisite impact.”
140. On this basis, incitement does not require evidence that
someone was actually incited. The test I must apply is whether the
ordinary reasonable user of the forum, drawing on their knowledge
and experience of worldly affairs, could have understood from the
website posting that they were being incited to hatred towards, serious
contempt for, or severe ridicule of, homosexuals. The Human Rights
and Discrimination Commissioner referred to a similar test
propounded in Burns v Radio 2UE Sydney Pty Ltd & Ors [2004] NSW
ADT 267, which is “ordinary reasonable audience, reader or listener
(that is not overly sensitive or too thick-skinned)”.10
141. This objective test must still be contextualised within the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
environment in which the actions complained of occurred (see,
Veloskey v Karagiannakis [2002] NSWADTAP 18 (at 25-26) in Sunol v
Collier (at 10). My assessment of whether the acts complained of
amount to incitement must be made in the context of the on-line
forum and my understanding of its users.
142. An example of the contextualisation is found in Kazak v John
Fairfax Publications Limited [2000] NSWADT 77, where in relation to
an allegation that an article in The Australian Financial Review was
racial vilification in terms of section 20C of the Anti-Discrimination Act
1977 (NSW), the NSW Administrative Decisions Tribunal said that “
the objective test which must be applied is the ordinary, reasonable
reader of The Australian Financial Review, who is not malevolently
inclined nor free from susceptibility to prejudice”, and that ‘[t]he
10 T-document 19, page 4.
audience is the “ordinary” reader, not the reader who is so sagacious
that he or she would not react to the publication as an ordinary
reader’.
143. The decision in Burns v Dye considered the objective test of
“ordinary reasonable person”, which is similar to the tests adopted in
the above cases. I am satisfied that the ordinary reasonable person
test is relevantly applicable in this matter, because I drew mostly from
the decision of Burns v Dye on the issue of “incitement” to unlawful
vilification.
144. I am of the view that the majority of those who read the Have
Your Say on-line forum were residents of the ACT and surrounding
areas. If I have an overview of this population, I consider that
ordinary, reasonable readers of the Canberra Times, which is the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! newspaper with largest circulation in the region, to be those that fall
into the audience described in the Kazak case. I do not have any
reason to depart from that view in relation to the participants in, and
readers of, the Have Your Say on-line forum. In this context, I am
also of the view that anyone who accesses the site should have their
attention drawn to the warning I mentioned in paragraph 128 above.
145. The alleged posts appeared at the time when strong community
views were prevalent in the context of the proposal for legislating for
same sex marriages. The issue is whether ordinary, reasonable
participants and readers of the forum were capable of being incited to
hatred towards, serious contempt for, or severe ridicule of, the
Applicant or homosexuals, by reading the posts which are the subject
of complaint in this case. It is not necessary that the words actually
“incited” persons.
146. I find the following observation by Nettle JA in Catch the Fire
Ministries Inc & Ors v Islamic Council of Victoria Inc [2006] VSCA 284 Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
at [14], in relation to the Victorian provision on vilification (i.e.
section 8 of the Racial and Religious Tolerance Act 2001), (as cited in
the NSW Administrative Decisions Tribunal in Burns v Laws (No 2)
[2007] NSWADT 47 at 99), is applicable with regard to the matter
before me:
“I accept that "incites" in s.8 means "urge[s], spur[s]
on...stir[s] up animates[s] or stimulate[s]". That accords with the
plain and ordinary meaning of the word and also with the
criminal law’s conception of incitement, upon which s.8
appears loosely to be based. I also allow that incitive conduct
is capable of contravening s.8 without necessarily causing
hatred or serious contempt or revulsion or serious ridicule. As
with the common law criminal offence of incitement, I view s.8
as directed to inchoate or preliminary conduct, whether or not it
causes the kind of third party response it is calculated to
encourage. In that sense, the section is prophylactic…”
147. The NSW Tribunal also observed that requiring proof of “actual
incitement” in relation to the vilification provision would appear to
“involve a departure from the text of the subsection” (see, Burns v
Laws (No 2) at paragraph [103].
148. I observe that the NSW Tribunal in that case preferred not to
use the expression whether words were “capable” of inciting an
ordinary reasonable person for the reason that the terms “capacity”
and “capable” have the potential to understate what must be proved,
and bear upon “what is in essence a threshold question only” in
defamation law. It preferred the issue to be “would the relevant
‘public act’ have had the ‘effect’ of inciting, in the sense of urging or
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! prompting, a hypothetical ‘ordinary reasonable person’ but continued
to say that “if terms such as ‘capacity’ or ‘tendency’...are to be
employed instead, it should be understood that they refer to the
actual effect rather than the potential or possible effect” (see, Burns v
Laws (No 2), at paragraphs [110 -111]).
149. I agree with this statement but am of the view that using the
reference to “capable” of inciting is consistent with authorities and
when it is used as “capable of inciting an ordinary reasonable person”,
its meaning is “having the effect of inciting” (that is, “urging, spurring
on, stirring up, animating or stimulating”) such a person” (see also,
Catch the Fire Ministries Inc v Islamic Council of Australia, at [14]).
(3). The effect of the act of incitement must be to incite hatred toward,
serious contempt for, or severe ridicule of, the Applicant
150. In its submissions to the Tribunal, the Respondent denies that
the act of publishing the material amounted to incitement to hatred Must !! AustLI AustLI AustLi
towards, serious contempt for, or severe ridicule of, the Applicant or
members of the group in question.
151. With regard to the construction of this third element of
vilification, the Tribunal in Burns v Dye [2002] NSWADT 32 at 33
stated:
“23 The third element the complainant must establish is that
the public act must be capable of inciting hatred towards,
serious contempt for or severe ridicule of a person or group of
persons. These words are to be given their ordinary dictionary
meaning. Kazak v John Fairfax Publications Limited [at 40] set
out the following definitons :
"hatred" means "intense dislike; detestation" (Macquarie), "a
feeling of hostility or strong aversion towards a person or thing;
active and violent dislike" (Oxford);
"serious" means "important, grave" (Oxford); "weighty,
important" (Macquarie);
"contempt" means "the action of scorning or despising, the
mental attitude in which something or someone is considered as
worthless or of little account"(Oxford); the feeling with which
one regards anything considered mean, vile, or worthless
(Macquarie);
"severe" means "rigorous, strict or harsh" (Oxford); "harsh,
extreme"(Macquarie);
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
"ridicule" means "subject to ridicule or mockery; make fun of,
deride, laugh at"(Oxford); "words or actions intended to excite
contemptuous laughter at a person or thing; derision"
(Macquarie).”
152. The Applicant submits that the posts fall within these
definitions. The Respondent contends (at paragraph 34 of the
Respondent’s submission) that the test in Burns v Dye is wrong. Its
contention is that the ACT does not have power to make mere
vilification illegal and that under the ACT Human Rights Act, this is
not an intended result. In this sense, the Respondent contends that
‘judicial decisions in other (Australian) jurisdictions which are
founded upon the notion of vilification being of itself illegal are not of
any direct relevance to the elucidation of the offence. Specifically
those (such as Burns v Dye [2002] NSWADT 32 at 56) which consider
that the test is whether the protected group is “targeted” by the
complained-of words are wrong’. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
153. The issue is not whether the posts were “mere vilification”. The
Respondent’s argument seems to be influenced by the American
jurisprudence he cites which ruled against law penalising mere
vilification in the light of the Constitutional guarantee of freedom of
speech and of press. What the Tribunal has to consider is whether
the alleged posts were unlawful vilification within the meaning of
section 66 of the Discrimination Act. For this purpose, decisions of
other jurisdictions which have similar provisions as section 66 will be
certainly helpful. A number of such decisions applied the principles of
international human rights law, for example Toben v Jones and Kazak
v John Fairfax Publications Ltd.
154. It appears to me that in referring to the ACT Human Rights Act
the Respondent wants to impress upon me that in the ACT the right to
freedom of expression should receive a higher consideration than in
other jurisdictions when considering the question of vilification,
similar to the higher level of consideration that right received in cases
from the United States.
155. Freedom of expression is in the fabric of the democracy in all
Australian jurisdictions, and is an implied right in the Australian
Constitution. I will have regard to the requirement under section 30
of the Human Rights Act in interpreting section 66 in a way that is
compatible with human rights. The Discrimination Commissioner
submitted that the restriction on rights placed by section 66 meets the
requirement under section 28 of the Human Rights Act.
156. The Respondent prefers United States’ authorities, in particular
Brandenburg v Ohio 395 US 444. The Respondent relies upon the
interpretation of “incitement” in the context of criminal law and, in
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! paragraphs 28, 29 and 30 of the Respondent’s submissions, the
Respondent states:
“28. ....The incitement, in short, must be to some unlawful
end, implicitly, the use of violence or the achievement of
some prohibited end, for example, an act of
discrimination.
29. Or, at the least, it must be to some act taking “dislike of”
to “hatred towards”, “contempt for” to “serious contempt
for”, and “ridicule” to “serious ridicule”.
30. Determining when this point is reached is a value
judgment that the tribunal cannot make casually or
without taking into account countervailing rights of
freedom of belief, expression and speech, or of the
intention of the legislature or international human rights
on the subject.” Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
157. I agree with these submissions except that the threshold for
incitement, under section 66, is incitement to hatred toward, serious
contempt for, or severe ridicule, of a person or group on the ground of
an attribute specified in section 66(1).
158. In Brandenburg v Ohio, the appellant, who was a leader of a Ku
Klux Klan group, was convicted under the Criminal Syndicalism Act,
for advocating, among others, voluntarily assembling to advocate the
doctrines of syndicalism. The appellant took part in a rally where
speeches were made derogatory of Negroes and, in one instance, of
Jews and he also spoke at the rally. The US Supreme Court decided
that the statute under which the appellant was convicted was invalid.
159. The Court took the view that the statute that did not distinguish
between mere advocacy from incitement to imminent lawless action
was not valid in light of the freedoms guaranteed by the First and
Fourteenth Amendments to the US constitution. The First
Amendment, among others, prohibits the abridging of freedom of
speech and of press. The Fourteenth Amendment prohibits denial to
any person the equal protection of the laws.
160. I find that the Respondent wants to persuade the Tribunal to
apply the Brandenburg decision to interpret section 66 and, thereby,
to give preponderance to its and the forum users’ right to freedom of
expression consistent with the ACT’s Human Rights Act.
161. While the interpretation of Brandenburg v Ohio provided by the
Respondent is persuasive on the Tribunal, I prefer to be directed by
the construction of the New South Wales Administrative Decisions
Tribunal in Burns v Dye.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
162. The question considered in Brandenburg revolved around the
distinction between mere advocacy of use of force and incitement to
imminent lawless action. The decision seems to justify intrusion into
the right to freedom of speech and of press only when an act amounts
to inciting to imminent lawless action. This high threshold backed by
the Constitutional guarantees in the United States is different to the
law this Tribunal has to consider in the present matter.
163. What we are considering is not the issue of mere vilification, but
unlawful vilification. Restriction on the right to freedom of expression
results under section 66 of the Discrimination Act where conduct
amounts to incitement to hatred, serious contempt or severe ridicule
on the ground of a specified attribute. Human rights are applied by
way of interpretation of laws rather than as guarantees and the value
the former approach accords to human rights has been no less
significant than that accorded by the latter approach which has been
stricter in favour of the rights. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
164. As the ACT Human Rights Commissioner submitted, so far as
possible to do so consistently with its purpose, ACT legislation must
be interpreted in a way compatible with the human rights set out in
the Human Rights Act. The right to freedom to hold opinions and the
right to freedom of expression are enshrined in section 16 of the
Human Rights Act, the rights derived from Article 19 of the ICCPR.
That Act also provides that:
(1) everyone has the right to have protection against
discrimination on any ground (section 8(3)); and
(2) human rights may be subject only to reasonable
limits set by Territory laws that can be demonstrably
justified in a free and democratic society (section 28).
165. The ACT Human Rights and Discrimination Commissioner, in
her decision of 25 October 2005, referred to Article 20(2) of the ICCPR,
which provides that “Any advocacy of national, racial or religious
hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or
violence shall be prohibited by law”, and took the view that anti-
vilification provisions that are limited to a strict test of “incitement” of
hatred, serious contempt or severe ridicule satisfy the proportionality
test in section 28.
166. I am in agreement with this view. Section 66 of the
Discrimination Act does curtail the freedom of expression only to the
extent the exercise of that freedom amounts to incitement to hatred,
serious contempt or severe ridicule, in relation to four attributes
specified in it. Further, I find that the right to freedom of expression
also, in turn, qualifies vilification through the operation of defences
provided in subsection 66(2).
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! 167. In line with its views on the right to freedom of expression, the
Respondent submits, at paragraph 50, that:
“Its instinct is to publish everything, other than that which is
clearly unlawful, improper, or in poor taste, because it believes
that it is essential in a working democracy that citizens have the
right to hold and express and advocate their opinions on all
matters concerning them.”
The Respondent further submits, at paragraph 52, that:
“It is the nature of passionate debate that people will have
strong views, and express themselves with vigour.”
168. In paragraph 52 of its submission, the Respondent also states
that “[n]or would the ordinary deduce from passionate words – even
one like to be offensive (about protected groups) – any offer of, threat
of, or incitement to violence”. However, as I have said before, what is Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
unlawful vilification is not necessarily incitement to violence.
169. In Burns v Dye [2002] NSWADT 32 (at [20)), the NSW
Administrative Decisions Tribunal said, in relation to NSW vilification
provisions, that,
“the vilification provisions of the Act do not make unlawful the
use of words that merely convey hatred towards a person, or the
expression of serious contempt or severe ridicule: Wagga
Wagga Aboriginal Action Group v Eldridge [1995] EOC 92-701
at 78-266.”
This statement equally applies in relation to ACT vilification
provisions.
170. What the Tribunal has to consider is whether the published
posts amounted to inciting the ordinary reasonable person, who
participates in the forum or reads the posts, to hatred towards,
serious contempt for, or severe ridicule of, the Applicant or
homosexuals.
(4). The incitement must be on the ground of the characteristics listed
in section 66(1) (which includes sexuality).
Applicable test
171. There is no dispute about the Applicant’s capacity as a member
of a relevant class of persons. Under this element, my reasoning will
examine “incitement” in relation to the Applicant’s sexuality.
172. [AustLII AustLII AustLII Austl I agree with the Applicant’s submission that the question of
incitement is an objective one. As argued by his counsel in the
proceedings of 11 July 2007, incitement does not need to have the
actual effect and that it is sufficient if the nature of the alleged posts
was capable of inciting.11 This requires an objective standard to prove.
The Applicant referred to Burns v Dye, in which, as I said in
tLI paragraph 143 above, the objective standard used was that of the
ordinary reasonable person.
173. That case concerned a complaint of homosexual vilification in
four incidents in 1999. The Tribunal said (at paragraph [22]) that
“the audience or potential audience of the public act should be
assumed to be the "ordinary reasonable person" as defined by
the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal in Inquiry Into Broadcasts
by Ron Casey (1989) 3 BR 351 at 357 and quoted with approval
in Harou-Sourdon v TCN Channel Nine Pty Ltd [1994] EOC 92-
604 at p.10: Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
The test to be applied is, in the Tribunal's view, an objective
one. The yardstick should not be a person peculiarly
susceptible to being roused to enmity, nor one who takes an
irrational or extremist view of the relations among racial
groups. The hypothetical listener should in the Tribunal's
view, be described as an ordinary, reasonable person not
immune from susceptibility to incitement, nor holding racially
prejudiced views.“
174. The NSW Tribunal raised the following questions for its answer
(at paragraph [56]):
Proceedings, pp.16-17.
“Would the ordinary reasonable person have understood
Mr Dye to be targeting and/or referring to Mr Burns?
If so, would Mr Dye's conduct have incited or have the capacity
to incite the ordinary reasonable person to feel hatred towards,
or serious contempt for, or severe ridicule of Mr Burns on the
grounds of his sexuality?”
175. I agree with the Applicant’s submission that the first of these
tests was satisfied in the present case to the extent that the ordinary
reasonable person would have understood the alleged posts to be
targeting and/or referring to homosexuals. The Applicant’s
submission refers to specific posts to support his position.12 The
Respondent does not refute it. However, I do not find that such a
person would have understood the posts to be targeting and/or
AustLy AustLII AustLII Aust! referring to the Applicant.
Whether ordinary reasonable person would have been incited
176. It is the second test in Burns case that is crucial for deciding the
nature of the homosexuality related posts in the forum. The Applicant
tLI submits that the following expressions targeting or referring to
homosexuals meet the second test:
 “pervert” (“Canada’s crazy parliament enacts pervert ‘marriage’”
posted by “GAT” on 30 June 2005),
 “pathogens” (“Factophobes shriek and reek”, posted by “GAT” on
23 August 2005),
 “slimy, smelly specimens” (“Factophobes shriek and reek”,
posted by “GAT” on 23 August 2005),
 “while they defecate over our children’s opportunity to grow up
free of their piteous influence…Stay away from schools Sad
Lobby…you cannot naturally have children of your own. Stay Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
away from mine.” (“Sexualising the Child via Government
funded Schools”, posted by “Darryl Potts” on 17 October 2005),
 “promotion of homosexual influence over children” (“Should
Nohope hold a plebiscite on pervert revolution?”, posted by “GAT”
on 9 August 2005)
177. Except the posts of 23 August 2005, others were not attached to
the Applicant’s original complaint to the ACT Human Rights Office.
Yet, this Tribunal finds that it is appropriate to admit the evidence of
the above posts in order that all the alleged posts will become relevant
to determine the issue of unlawful vilification. Under section 81 of the
Act, the Commissioner must decline a complaint if it relates to an act,
or the last in a series of acts, that took place more than 12 months
before the complaint is lodged. The posts were published within this
12 Applicant’s Legal Submission, pp.3-4.
time period and one was posted in October 2005, soon after the date
of the complaint.
178. The Applicant argues that,“[o]rdinary, reasonable people fear
criminals, perverts and paedophiles and often express that fear in
contempt and hatred.”
179. His further argument is as follows:
“Given that homosexuality is still not visible in our society, the
ordinary reasonable person may have little by way of accurate
information to counter the opinion of others, so vehemently
expressed. Further, the image of homosexuals as sexual
perverts and child molesters is one commonly found in
popular culture, from movies to news reporting. Given all
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! these factors, an ordinary reasonable person would be swayed
by the forceful opinions expressed and would be likely to feel
hatred and serious contempt for homosexuals, believing there to
be truth in the allegations of perversion and paedophilia.”
180. The Applicant’s allegation that the posts imply homosexuality
with paedophilia seems to be connected to last two posts referred to in
paragraph 176 above.
181. In support of his argument, the Applicant refers to the decision
of Peters v Constance [2005] QADT 9, where the Acting President of
the Queensland Anti-Discrimination Tribunal, Jean Dalton SC, held
that she was satisfied ‘that the word “paedophilia” is a characteristic
often wrongly attributed to homosexual men’ and took the view that
the allegation of paedophilia was “sufficient to incite hatred, serious
contempt or severe ridicule of the person to whom it was directed”.
Issue of context Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
182. Two other matters the Applicant argues why the ordinary,
reasonable person would be incited to act in response the forum posts
are
(a) the standing of The Canberra Times in the community which
added credibility to the vilifying posts associated with it, thus
having more power to incite; and
(b) the “tone” of the posts in the Have Your Say forum, which,
the Applicant states, conveyed strong messages that
homosexuals were a threat to “normal” people and such a
tone incites hatred, serious contempt or severe ridicule of,
homosexuals.
183. In the first of the four incidents considered in Burns v Dye the
defendant (Mr Dye) verbally abused the complainant (Mr Burns) as
“faggot”, and “poofter” along with other abusive words. The
complainant felt terrified. To the defendant’s argument that these
words were of general insult, the Tribunal said (at paragraph [60])
that, ‘[w]hile we accept that over time certain terms of abuse take on a
more general connotation we find that the words "poofter" and "faggot"
retain a specific meaning: they are derisory terms used for
homosexual males’.
184. The Tribunal said further (at paragraphs [62], [63] and [64])
that,
“[i]t does not follow automatically that verbal abuse directed at
a homosexual person or persons that includes words
understood to be insulting of homosexuals, is capable of
inciting the requisite ill-feeling required to establish a
complaint of homosexual vilification. The circumstances in
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! which the abuse occurred are critical. Relevant factors will
include the context in which the abuse occurred, the tone of
voice used by the alleged vilifier and the observable
relationship between the vilifier and his/her victim.
63 To establish capacity to incite, it is not enough in our
view to merely prove that the offending communication
identified or "outed" Mr Burns as homosexual. Nor is it
sufficient to prove that the victim was deeply wounded or
concerned for their privacy, or indeed safety. It is also
insufficient to establish that the conduct simply conveyed
hatred towards a person, or the expression of serious contempt
or severe ridicule: (Wagga Wagga Aboriginal Action Group v
Eldridge).
64 Mr Burns must establish, on balance, that all or part of Mr
Dye's conduct was capable of urging on, stimulating, or
prompting to action the ordinary reasonable person to the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
requisite feelings of ill will towards Mr Burns. How would
such person react on hearing Mr Dye's attack on
Mr Burns? In our view a section of the community would
have dismissed this conduct as the rantings of a drunken,
possibly mentally-ill individual and, if anything, the attack
may have engendered feelings of hatred towards, serious
contempt for, or severe ridicule of Mr Dye himself.”
185. The type of ordinary reasonable person, for the purpose of the
present matter (adopting the Burns v Dye test), is a reasonable person
not immune from susceptibility to incitement, nor holding a
prejudiced view about homosexuality. The NSW Tribunal, applying
the ordinary reasonable person test, decided that there was no
homosexual vilification when the defendant verbally abused the
complainant. The Tribunal considered the characteristics of the
defendant, as a simple, poorly educated man and the circumstances
where the drunken defendant who, from outward appearance, “would
not appear to enjoy any position of respect or influence”, “would be
unlikely to influence, urge or prompt, any witness to this assault to
feelings of ill will towards Mr Burns”.
186. However, Tony Silva, a member of the Tribunal, in his minority
decision, applying the same test, came to a different conclusion. He
said (at paragraph [113]) that,
“[t]he evidence shows, on the late evenings of
1 September 99 (or 31 August 99) & 2 September 99,
Mr. Dye hurled abuse at Mr. Burns. Mr Dye's abuse would
have made it abundantly clear to the hypothetical observer
that he hated or held feelings of serious contempt and /or
severe ridicule for Mr. Burns. I am comfortably satisfied
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! that this abuse would have incited feelings of severe ridicule in
third parties, including those not immune from susceptibility
to incitement or prejudice.”
The reason for his decision was as follows:
‘I believe use of the words "cocksucker", "faggot cunt", "you're a
fucking faggot aren't you", "Faggot Burns come out and talk to
me." Etc, especially the first two are of such extreme ridiculing
nature that an ordinary reasonable person not immune from
susceptibility to incitement nor holding prejudicial view about
homosexuals would be incited to serious ridicule. I believe this
incitement to serious ridicule could take place independent of
whatever unpleasant feeling or even ridicule, they may have for
Mr. Dye, the abuser. I believe people react to what they see
and hear, straightaway and though they may have second
thoughts about their feelings later. Being late evening/late
night it adds to the incitement to serious ridicule.” (at Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
paragraph [116])
187. I note that the decision of all members of the Tribunal was
influenced by the context that they considered important. While the
majority decision had had regard to the drunken state of the
defendant and the lack of influence he could have on others, the
minority decision gave weight to the nature of the words and
evidently, the possibility of the defendant’s feelings of severe ridicule
towards the complainant influencing an ordinary reasonable person
as soon as they heard those words.
188. Tony Silva provides a useful description of a relevant ordinary
reasonable person in “the contemporary society” as follows:
“Let us look at this ordinary reasonable person. This person is
from contemporary society and not from a utopian society.
That is, the society at the relevant time, August 99 - March
2001. This person is part of the society and as such his
attitude would be that of an average person. In my opinion, in
matters related to homosexuality, the society in general
has been struggling to come to terms with it. This is seen by the
anti-homosexual attitude often taken by religious and other
institutions, which are very powerful in influencing the attitude
of the society in general. In my opinion not only in the relevant
period but even now an uncomfortable and un-accepting feeling
in the society about homosexuality exists and thus in my
opinion an ordinary reasonable person, while not necessarily
holding prejudicial view, could be more susceptible to
incitement against homosexuals.” (at paragraph [117])
189. I agree that what I have to decide is whether or not the posts
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! complained of were capable of inciting an ordinary reasonable person
in the contemporary society at the relevant time when the posts were
published on the Have Your Say forum.
190. In relation to another incident heard in Burns v Dye, that is, the
defendant defacing the complainant’s front door with drawing on it a
large penis and the words “fag lives here, faggots should die”, the
Tribunal held that it was capable of inciting third parties. The
Tribunal formed the view that the drawing and writing were implicitly
addressed to passers-by as well as to the complainant, and found that
this communication “was capable of stirring up, spurring on, or
urging hatred of, or at the very least severe contempt for,” the
complainant.
Relevant context
191. I take into account the context in which the debate about
homosexuality took place in the on-line forum. It was the time when Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
there was a proposal to legally recognise same sex marriages. That
being a new idea at the time, to use Tony Silva’s words in Burns v Dye,
when the society in general had been “struggling to come to terms
with it”, the issue naturally gave rise to a passionate debate. The
forum posts mirrored the views of the society, and the publications
were in colloquial language – which, unlike formal language, could be
easily used to express strong, passionate, and even unrefined, views
on issues.
192. The question of vilification must be viewed in the context of a
particular debate. In this connection, the following extract from
Kazak v John Fairfax Publications Limited (at paragraph [59]) is
relevant for me to consider:
“We do not accept that the existence of intense discussion or
debate about a particular issue is a factor which would
tend to suggest that a public act does not amount to
vilification. Indeed the existence of an intense and ongoing
debate is a likely breeding ground for racially vilifying
comments.”
193. The vulnerability of homosexual people to discrimination and
vilification in the light of homophobia prevalent in the society is
explained by the Human Rights Commissioner in her submission.
She also referred to reports of the Australia Institute and a 2003
report commissioned by the NSW Attorney-General’s Department to
support her submission. The Commissioner also refers to a survey in
March 2006 by the Australian Research Centre in Sex, Health &
Society at La Trobe University which indicated that homosexuals
experienced harassment and fear of prejudice and discrimination.
194. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! In this context of the society, it is quite natural for the Applicant
(and also any member of the gay community) to have the feelings that
he claimed to have had when he read the posts. Also, in that context,
a public act of vilifying homosexuals would have the potential for
people to have hatred, contempt or ridicule, including serious
contempt or severe ridicule, towards homosexuals, depending on the
gravity of the words and situation.
Vilification - finding
195. The expressions “pervert”, “pathogens”, “slimy, smelly
specimens”, “while they defecate over our children’s opportunity to grow
up free of their piteous influence…Stay away from schools Sad
Lobby…you cannot naturally have children of your own. Stay away
from mine.” “promotion of homosexual influence over children” found in
the alleged posts and their tones were of similar gravity as the words
we have seen in Burns v Dye. At the time when there was
“uncomfortable and un-accepting feeling in the society about Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
homosexuality”, I am satisfied that these words were capable of being
more than mere vilification and were seriously disturbing the feelings
of the readers of the posts.
196. I find the alleged posts, when they were read by an ordinary
reasonable person in the society at the relevant time, were capable of
inciting such a person to hatred towards, serious contempt for, or
severe ridicule of, homosexuals, the group of people of whom the
Applicant is a member. Incitement relating to any one of these
specified mental attitudes is enough to meet the existence of unlawful
vilification within the meaning of section 66 of the Discrimination Act.
In this case, I am satisfied that the posts were capable of inciting an
ordinary reasonable person to any of those attitudes.
197. Had the alleged words concerning homosexuals appeared in the
Canberra Times, it would be patent that they would be capable of
inciting an ordinary reasonable reader, as soon as they read the
expressions, to feel hatred towards, serious contempt for, or severe
ridicule of, homosexuals, while feeling the same generally about the
authors (who were not known to the readers) of the writing. I do not
find that publication in the forum, although it had limited readership
and limited exposure unlike the Canberra Times, made any different
to the vilifying capability of the words it carried.
198. The Respondent argued that the Canberra Times was not
lending its authority to any particular views expressed in the forum.13
The on-line forum was popular because it was sponsored by the
Canberra Times, a newspaper well-respected by, and widely circulated
in, Canberra. However, there is no evidence before the Tribunal that
the Respondent’s standing had had the effect of influencing an
ordinary reasonable person to be incited.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
199. I consider that those who know the standing of the Canberra
Times would acknowledge that the on-line forum sponsored by it was
to serve the members of the public to air their views freely and was
not to be used for inciting violence, hatred, contempt or ridicule.
Nevertheless, this perception did not prevent me from finding that
some words used in the forum amounted to unlawful vilification of
homosexuals.
200. The Applicant, in his submission (at page 7) claims that he ‘was
“a person affected by” the vilifying posts as he describes himself as ‘a
homosexual (“gay’) man’ and, in his witness statement states that he
felt vilified by the posts. He also states that he “thus possesses the
characteristic which was the basis of incitement”. I will take this
statement as evidencing the Applicant’s interest in bringing the claim
of vilification of homosexuals, but the alleged posts were not
vilification of the Applicant in his personal capacity. The posts were
not capable of inciting an ordinary reasonable person towards the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Applicant, whose identity no forum reader knew.
201. Counsel for the Applicant argued that allegations made of
equating homosexuality with paedophilia can engender serious
reactions amongst people. This is true even now when the society has
can be said to have come to terms with accepting gays and lesbians.
It would be possible to argue that certain words (such as “while they
defecate over our children’s opportunity to grow up free of their piteous
influence…Stay away from schools Sad Lobby…you cannot naturally
have children of your own. Stay away from mine.” “promotion of
homosexual influence over children”) were not implying that
homosexuals are paedophiles. Nevertheless, in the context of the
community perception (see, paragraph 195 above) the thought that
would spring up in the minds of an ordinary reasonable person, when
13 Proceedings, p.22.
the person read the words, would be that the words either insinuate
or directly mean that homosexuals are paedophiles and so that
parents and children should keep away from them. The tone of the
expressions also would add to this thought.
202. Different grounds of unlawful vilification under section 66 will
have different threshold for incitement, for example, the threshold for
racial vilification would be lower than sexuality vilification. In Kazak’s
case, the NSW Administrative Decisions Tribunal said that
“Communications about a historically oppressed minority group are
far more likely to cause harm to that group than communications
which relate to the dominant majority.” This Tribunal has not applied
the lower threshold applying to racial vilification matters. Hence,
decisions relating to racial vilification were considered only where they
are relevant to the matter before the Tribunal.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
203. Nevertheless, the Tribunal bears in mind the approach taken by
the High Court in Bringinshaw v Briginshaw [1938] HCA 34; (1938) 60
CLR 336 in this connection of applying a sliding scale of standard of
proof in accordance with gravity, significance and consequences of the
decision.
204. For finding “incitement” in the context of unlawful vilification
under the Discrimination Act, the criminal standard of proof advocated
by the Respondent is not appropriate. I also find that the
circumstances and law relating to decisions from the United States
referred to by the Respondent were different to those in relation to
which this Tribunal must make a decision. In particular, a higher
threshold for “incitement” is required in the United States in the
context of the operation of the constitutional guarantee of freedom of
speech and of press in relation to criminal law.
205. The Human Rights and Discrimination Commissioner expressed Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
the opinion that ‘the published comments of anonymous people such
as “GAT” convey opinions of serious contempt, but may not be capable
of inciting serious contempt of homosexuals”. The Commissioner’s
interpretation was based on her view that a high threshold was
required of conduct to amount to incitement in the light of the right to
freedom of expression. I agree that a high threshold is required for
conduct to amount to incitement under section 66 but it is not
measured by the criminal standard.
206. As I found in paragraph 189 above, the relevant threshold to
apply is the objective standard of whether an ordinary reasonable
person would have been incited to hatred, contempt or ridicule when
the person read the relevant words in the posts.
207. With regard to limitation placed on the freedom of expression by
the anti-vilification provision, the Commissioner had had regard to
Article 20(2) of the ICCPR, which provides that “[a]ny advocacy of
national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence shall be prohibited by law.“ While
the threshold for incitement under this Article of the ICCPR is
“discrimination, hostility or violence”, incitement under the
Discrimination Act is unlawful if it relates to hatred, serious contempt
or severe ridicule. The ordinary reasonable person test applied by me
meets the balance between the right to privacy and reputation and the
right to freedom of expression and is the appropriate restriction on the
right to freedom of expression in the context of this case.
208. For the reasons I have set out above, I find, as I stated in
paragraph 196 above, that the Applicant’s claim of unlawful
vilification to the extent of vilifying homosexuals is substantiated.
209. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! I need to re-emphasise that unlawful sexuality vilification in this
case involved a class of homosexuals in society and not the Applicant
in particular.
210. I will now turn to consider the Respondent’s defence to unlawful
vilification.
PART 4 – DEFENCE UNDER SECTION 66(2)(C)
Elements of the defence
211. In submissions to the Tribunal, the Human Rights and
Discrimination Commissioner reiterates that the actual conduct of the
Respondent may not meet the very high level of conduct required by
section 66. (See, paragraph [17], and T-document 19, page 7.)
212. Notwithstanding the position of the Commissioner, I found that
claim for unlawful vilification was proven in favour of the Applicant for Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
the reasons I have given in PART 3 above.
213. The Respondent submits that if the act complained of did
amount to vilification according to section 66(1), the defence in section
66(2)(c) would apply. The defence under section 66(2)(c) is where the
public act (within the meaning of section 65) is “done reasonably and
honestly for….purposes in the public interest, including discussion or
debate about and presentations of any matter.”
214. The Respondent also submits14that “reasonableness and
honesty go to the act of promoting forum discussions and debates on
matters of public interest”. I agree with this submission. In
paragraph 134 above, I said that the “public act” here is the specific
act of posting of individual messages, including the decision to edit
14 Respondent’s submission, paragraph [73].
and deletion of messages, onto the forum. For the purpose of the
defence under section 66(2)(c), I find that I have to widen the scope of
inquiry from the actual posts to the circumstances in which those
posts were published. The elements of “reasonableness and honesty”,
“public interest” and “discussions or debate” warrant this approach.
215. My consideration of the defence to the claim of vilification
involves the balancing of rights, in particular the right to freedom of
expression and the rights to reputation and privacy.
216. The Respondent submits that,
“the intention of the respondent goes no higher than to
provide a platform or forum at which citizens can express
opinions on matters of public interest or concern. Its instinct
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! it to publish everything, other than that which is clearly
unlawful, improper, or in poor taste, because it believes that it
is essential in a working democracy that citizens have the
right to hold and express and advocate their opinions on all
matters concerning them.”15
217. The Respondent contends that an ordinary reader of
publications of the Canberra Times, including the Have Your Say
column, “would clearly understand that the publisher did not itself
adopt or endorse any particular views in matters in controversy in
HYS, or that, if it had any views of its own, they would be separately
expressed”.16
Respondent’s justification for publishing the posts
218. As regards its action being in the public interest, the
Respondent argues “that in providing a forum for different points of
view, including unpopular views and views which some people might Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
find offensive or distasteful, the respondent is acting in the public
interest”.17
219. As regards the strong statements by ”GAT” (a contributor to the
forum), some of whose statements were also the subject of the
complaint, the Respondent denies that they amounted to inciting
disaffection against homosexuals or inciting discrimination or
unlawful acts against them. It submits that “[t]hese are neither the
intended nor the likely consequences of his remarks”.18
220. The editor of the forum states that he was “entirely satisfied”
that GAT’s views were honestly and sincerely held by him. I assume
15 Ibid, paragraph [50].
16 Ibid, paragraph [51].
17 Ibid, paragraph [56].
18 tl AustLll AustLll AustLll Ibid, paragraph[ 64].
that the Respondent’s position is the same in relation to
homosexuality vilifying posts from others.
221. The editor also states the following:
“GAT’s views have been vigorously expressed, and have
attracted vigorously expressed responses……These have
involved personal attacks on him.”19
“I have considered that a degree of latitude in relation to
abuse has, in the circumstances, been acceptable, in a
manner somewhat akin to the qualified privilege accorded
under defamation law to person defending their honour and
their reputation. However, I have edited or rejected letters
from GAT in cases where I have judged that they amount to
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! sheer abuse – which is to say that they introduce no matter or
principle into the debate, merely ad hominem attack.”20
222. Since the forum was for the public to debate on issues, the
editor could not have ignored the views of persons opposing or
strongly opposing homosexuality when there was strong concern in
the community about the proposal to place homosexuality on an equal
footing with heterosexuality and, would not be expected to take steps
to selectively avoid publishing offensive or hurtful views expressed by
those persons.
223. Because the forum is a people’s forum, the editor explains the
difference in the procedures for publishing between the Canberra
Times and the forum, in that in relation to the on-line forum “[t]hose
who wrote letters were obliged to supply their name and address –
which might not be published”. He also states,
‘Any contributions they made were inspected, usually by Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
myself, before being allowed to go online. It was not a “chat-
room”, where participants vetted or otherwise, had their
contributions immediately appear.’
“Since organising and editing such correspondence is time-
consuming, and, often, tedious, I decided at an early stage of
the on-line column that I would not sub-edit contributions so as
to remove infelicities of grammar, illiteracies, misspellings or
bizarre or questionable logic.”
“Contributions were however vetted for material which was
judged defamatory, in contempt of court, in breach of various
intellectual property laws, otherwise in breach of the law, or
19 Respondent’s witness statement, paragraph [28].
20 Ibid, paragraph [29].
breach of taste. Some submitted correspondence was censored
on such grounds by the excision of words, other contributions
were simply rejected….”
224. In the hearing on 11 July 2006, Jack Waterford, editor in
charge of The Canberra Times, said,
“It’s fundamental to any sort of free speech advocacy that the
best way of ferreting out bad opinions is by exposing them to
public gaze and to public debate, and having them identified as
such.
……..if views are proscribed, censored, unallowed to be
entertained, then they will gain currency by the very virtue of
their being illicit and wicked, or whatever, and gain
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! strength.”
225. In his article in the Canberra Times of 24 September 2009, the
editor of the forum says that “even under his liberal regime, a number
of letters on both sides seemed to cross the line of proper, if willing,
discourse, and were not posted”.
An extract from this article is as follows:
“What people are not allowed to do, as I understand it, is to
incite hatred, serious ridicule or serious contempt against
homosexuals – a phrase which, from its foundation in the old
sedition laws, means, in effect, to preach violence towards or
persecution of homosexuals.”
226. Although the editor’s understanding that vilification is
preaching violence is not entirely correct, the statement signifies his,
presumably honest, view. This understanding explains why the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Respondent, in its submission, was relying on American decisions
which dealt with the issue of advocacy of inciting violence.
227. The Respondent’s justification for publishing views that some
may regard as offensive or distasteful is as follows:
“ providing a forum for different points of view, including
unpopular views and views that some people might find
offensive or distasteful, the respondent is acting in the public
interest, indeed the public interest recognised and supported
by the law courts.”21
“ remarks are focused on the wisdom of public acts
and policies designed to promote the view that homosexuality is
21 Respondent’s submission, paragraph [56].
morally equivalent to any other sexuality (words in italics
added).” 22
228. It is evident from the Respondent’s submission and statements
above, that he honestly held the view that the alleged posts were
nothing more than opinions even though they were offensive or
distasteful.
Principles followed by the Respondent
229. It appears that the Respondent seeks to draw support from the
principles of the defence of qualified privilege in defamatory
publication matters. It argues that the fact that it vetted posts for
compliance with the law as well as of taste supports the proposition of
reasonableness and honesty. I find that the threshold for the defence
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! of qualified privilege is higher than the defence under section 66(2)(c),
but the principles behind the defence to defamation will be useful in
considering what level of reasonableness and honesty applies in the
defence to unlawful vilification.
230. In regard to the elements of reasonableness and honesty, the
Respondent cited the cases of Theophanous v The Herald and Weekly
Times Ltd [1992-1994] 182 CLR 104 and Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation [1997] 189 CLR 520.
231. In Theophanous v The Herald and Weekly Times Ltd (at p.141),
the High Court took the position that the implied freedom of
communication was consistent with the defence of qualified privilege.
The Respondent refers to the High Court’s interpretation (at p.137) of
“reasonableness”23 but I note that it relates to where the publication
involved falsity. I also observe that that case was concerned with a
political discussion. In the matter before me, the falsity is not an
issue. However, the requirement that the publisher, to benefit from Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
the defence, must show, “in the circumstances which prevailed, it
acted reasonably, either by taking some step to check the accuracy of
the impugned material or by establishing that it was otherwise
justified in publishing without taking such steps or steps which were
adequate” (see, Theophanous, at p.137), is relevant for me to consider.
232. In Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation, the High Court
said as follows in relation to “reasonableness” in the context of the
defence of qualified privilege:
“Having regard to the interest that the members of the
Australian community have in receiving information on
government and political matters that affect them, the
22 Ibid, paragraph [64].
23 Theophanous case, p.137
reputations of those defamed by widespread publications
will be adequately protected by requiring the publisher to
prove reasonableness of conduct. The protection of those
reputations will be further enhanced by the requirement
that the defence will be defeated if the person defamed proves
that the publication was actuated by common law malice to the
extent that the elements of malice are not covered under the
rubric of reasonableness.”
233. The posts in the forum were public acts. The debate in which
posts were published in forum was in the context of the ACT
Government’s policy proposal for recognising same sex marriages,
hence, a matter of public interest. As Jack Waterford, the
Respondent’s editor at large, said in the hearing of 11 July 200624 the
debates in the forum “were about public policy proposals about the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! granting of certain additional rights to homosexual people, for
example, as to gay marriage which is a live and controversial issue in
the community, or to rights of adoption….”
234. This Tribunal finds that a policy that impacts on, or is of
interest, to the members of the public, is a political matter, and that
the issue of homosexuality was a matter of public interest at the time
when there was current a policy proposal for recognising same sex
marriage.
Defence – finding
235. The right to freedom of expression that enlivens the defence in
section 66(2)(c) places restriction on the right to reputation. A similar
restriction is seen operating in the sphere of law relating to defences
to defamation involving political matters. The effect of which is, using
the terms in section 28 of the Human Rights Act, a reasonable limit
demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society. This is so in Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
relation to the defence under section 66(2)(c) which will require a
lower threshold than the qualified privilege in relation to
“reasonableness”. This lower threshold is commensurate with the
gravity of vilification which is comparatively of less gravity than
defamation.
236. From the submissions made by the Respondent and the
relevant case law, I am satisfied that the Respondent has established
the defence under section 66(2)(c). Its honesty in relation to
publishing the posts, including the vilifying posts, is accepted. There
is no doubt that the Respondent had no intention to vilify
homosexuals. Of course, intention is not necessary to establish
unlawful vilification, but the absence of intention is relevant to
Page 23.
establish the defence, in particular the elements of reasonableness
and honesty.
237. I am convinced that the Respondent honestly believed that it
complied with law in relation to editing the publications. What I
consider not supportive of the Respondent in its editing the posts was
that there was no clear guidance as to when would a publication
amount to unlawful vilification, although it could be said that what
would amount to serious vilification may be obvious to any
responsible media if it acted reasonably and honestly. In light of
(a) the nature of the forum where people feel free to use
colloquial terms,
(b) the policy that the Respondent considered appropriate and
applied in the belief that it complies with law, and
(c) the Respondent’s subsequent conduct of ceasing the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! operation of the forum pending the outcome of this case,
I find that the action taken by the editor were that of a responsible
media editor.
238. In view of the above considerations, I am satisfied that the
Respondent acted reasonably and honestly in publishing the vilifying
posts.
239. About taking into account the subsequent conduct of the
Respondent to a vilification claim, I observe the NSW Tribunal in
Burns v Laws (No 2) (at paragraph [257]) considered the steps taken
by the respondent to apologise to the homosexual community as
supporting his good faith.
Aspects of “reasonableness” and “honesty”
240. I have examined above the facts and submissions available to
me to uphold the reasonableness and honesty of the Respondent’s Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
conduct in meeting the defence to the unlawful vilification claim.
I would like to explain that reasonableness and honesty are two
elements of the defence. The Appeal Panel of the NSW Administrative
Decisions Tribunal in Burns v Laws (EOD) [2008] NSWADTAP 32 (at
paragraphs [73 – 75]) referred to the support in case law for not
having separate inquiries in the assessment of “good faith” (which is
“honesty” in the ACT provision) and “reasonableness” in the vilification
defence provisions by treating both terms as a composite expression.
This approach, which simply looks at all the evidence and making an
objective judgement, was not favoured by the Appeal Panel.
241. However, looking at all the evidence would demonstrate whether
the defendant acted reasonably and honestly, and if the evidence
shows that the defendant acted reasonably but not honestly or
honestly but not reasonably, the defence under section 66(2)(c) would
not be established. French J in Bropho said (at paragraph [102]) said
about the “good faith” exercise as follows: “A person acting in the
exercise of a protected freedom of speech or expression …..will act in
good faith if he or she is subjectively honest, and objectively viewed,
has taken a conscientious approach to advancing the exercising of
that freedom in a way that is designed to minimise the offence or
insult, humiliation or intimidation suffered by people affected it”.
242. I find that the Respondent had not acted dishonestly or for
improper purpose or “carelessly disregarding or wilfully blind” to the
effect of its publications. The Respondent had a policy in relation to
the on-line forum and applied it in the way it understood to be
complying with the law. It did not have an intention to vilify
homosexuals. Its post-event act of ceasing to continue with the forum
pending the outcome of this decision also supports the conclusion
that it acted honestly.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
243. That the Respondent acted reasonably is borne out by
objectively viewing
(a) the fact that the Respondent acted honestly in relation to the
publication of posts, and
(b) the fact that it applied policy and censorship to meet the
requirement to exercise due care to avoid or minimise the
consequences of offensive, vilifying posts.
244. The warning I mentioned above in paragraph 128 would have
added to the reasonableness of the Respondent’s conduct.
Vilification of the Applicant would make a difference
245. As a matter of caution, I state that this defence would not have
been established had the unlawful vilification targeted the Applicant
as opposed to a group of people with a characteristic of
homosexuality. As I found in paragraph 196 above, vilification was of Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
homosexuals.
246. Had vilification was against the Applicant, that is, situation
similar to that in Burns v Dye, although the words expressed were not
in the presence of the Applicant, the evidence presented by the
Respondent would not amount to making its conduct a public act
done reasonably and honestly in the public interest. Incitement of
hatred towards, serious contempt for, or severe ridicule of, the
Applicant in his personal capacity as a homosexual would call for a
higher threshold for the Respondent to meet in proving its defence.
This would be because the Respondent’s knowledge about the
Applicant would militate against its action being done reasonably and
honestly, even as a public act and in the public interest, including
discussion or debate. Intention to target the Applicant, in those
circumstances, would be readily and strongly presumed, and the
Respondent would need to displace that presumption.
The human rights context
247. In the human rights context, I find that section 66 engages the
rights to reputation, privacy and freedom of expression. I also find
that in section 66(1) the right to reputation and the right to privacy
place restriction on the right to freedom of expression, and that the
defence in section 66(2)(c) enables the right to freedom of expression
to place limits on the right to reputation and the right to privacy.
248. At this point, I refer to the Applicant’s submission that
“Free expression rights are protected by the onerous standards that
must be satisfied before a complainant can prove a claim of
….vilification…”.25 I agree with this submission but also observe
that, again as submitted by the Applicant, that section 66 is the “least
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! restrictive means” of limiting the freedom of expression, consistent
with the “proportionality” test propounded in section 28 of the Human
Rights Act. 26
249. Even though proof of unlawful vilification must meet the
onerous standards so as to justify the limit on the right to freedom of
expression, that right still has a significant role in establishing the
defence under section 66(2)(c) of the Discrimination Act. In PART 5 of
this decision, I have given reasons why I do not agree with the Human
Rights Commissioner’s argument, on the basis of the decision in
Toben v Jones, that the defence in section 66(2)(c) should be
interpreted narrowly.
250. The defence will also need to meet the onerous standards to
establish that, in the face of vilification, its exercise of the right to
freedom of expression was done reasonably and honestly. The
resultant outcome would be the balancing of the limit on the right to
freedom of expression under section 66(1) on the one hand, and the Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
limit on the rights to reputation and privacy under section 66(2(c) on
the other.
251. The warning process mentioned in paragraph 128 above would
strengthen the Respondent’s position in this respect.
PART 5 – HUM AN RIGHTS COMMISSIONER’S SUBMISSION ON
THE APPLICATION OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS ACT 2004
Provisions of the Human Rights Act
252. The ACT Human Rights Commissioner intervened in the
proceedings by leave granted by the Tribunal pursuant to section 36
25 Applicant’s witness statement, page 17.
26 Ibid, page 16.
of the Human Rights Act. The Commissioner seeks intervention in a
proceeding before a court or tribunal where it involves the application
of the Human Rights Act.
253. The Commissioner’s submission and further submission have
been helpful to this Tribunal in the interpretation of the relevant
provisions of the Discrimination Act and also to assess the impact of
human rights on issues raised by the Applicant and the Respondent.
I have addressed the impact of human rights at the relevant parts of
my findings.
254. For the purpose of completion, I set out below the aspects in the
Human Rights Commissioner’s submissions, which I have given
consideration.
255. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! As I said before, the guarantee of freedom of political discourse
is an implied principle in the Australian Constitution. This principle
limits the powers of Parliament in the creation of laws that limit
freedom of political discussion. However, when determining whether a
Commonwealth, State or local law is inconsistent with this implied
guarantee, the High Court will apply a balancing test between the
interest being served by the incursion on the freedom and the level of
imposition on the freedom (see, Australian Capital Television P/L v
Commonwealth (2) (1992) 177 CLR 106; Theophanous v Herald and
Weekly Times.
256. This is the context in which this Respondent’s case is framed –
that there must be a balance between the right that the Applicant
alleges has been infringed and the implied guarantee of freedom of
political discourse. The Respondent submits (at paragraph 7) that
interpretation of the Discrimination Act must be guided by the
existence of the ACT Human Rights Act and the general constitutional
guarantee of freedom of political discourse. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
257. The Human Rights Commissioner submits that
 interpretation of ACT legislation must be so far as possible
consistent with the human rights set out in the Human Rights
Act; and
 that section 16 of the Human Rights Act affects the
interpretation of sections 20(c) and 66 of the Discrimination Act.
258. Section 16 of the Human Rights Act enshrines the right to
freedom of expression.27 The right to freedom of expression is not an
unlimited right as made clear by Article 19 of the ICCPR.28
27 Section 16, Human Rights Act:
“16 Freedom of expression
(1) Everyone has the right to hold opinions without interference.
259. Section 30 the Human Rights Act provides for the requirement
that Territory laws be interpreted, as far as possible, in a way that is
consistent with the human rights. Section 31 of the Human Rights Act
provides that in interpreting a human right, the relevant international
law, and the judgments of foreign and international courts and
tribunals, may be considered. The Commissioner submits that this
position is “an extension to the ordinary rule of interpretation as set
out in s142 of the Legislation Act 2001 (ACT) which expressly permits
reference to Australia’s international treaty obligations to determine
the meaning of statutory provisions”. I quote sections 30 and 31 of
the Human Rights Act as follows29:
“30 Interpretation of laws and human rights
(1) In working out the meaning of a Territory law, an
+LILAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! interpretation that is consistent with human rights is as far
as possible to be preferred.
(2) Subsection (1) is subject to the Legislation Act, section 139.
Note Legislation Act, s 139 requires the interpretation that would best
achieve the purpose of a law to be preferred to any other
interpretation (the purposive test).
(2) Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right includes
the freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all
kinds, regardless of borders, whether orally, in writing or in print, by
way of art, or in another way chosen by him or her.”
28 Article 19, ICCPR
“1. Everyone shall have the right to hold opinions without interference.
2. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of expression; this right shall include
freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of
frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through any other
media of his choice.
3. The exercise of the rights provided for in paragraph 2 of this article carries with it Must !!! Aust!Il AustLI AustLi
special duties and responsibilities. It may therefore be subject to certain restrictions,
but these shall only be such as are provided by law and are necessary:
(a) For respect of the rights or reputations of others;
(b) For the protection of national security or of public order (ordre public), or of
public health or morals.”
29 These provisions were in the version of the Act as it stood at the time the
complainant made the complainant, namely, 24 August 2005. The current form of
section 30 is as follows:
“30 Interpretation of laws and human rights
So far as it is possible to do so consistently with its purpose, a Territory
law must be interpreted in a way that is compatible with human rights.”
.
(3) In this section:
working out the meaning of a Territory law means—
(a) resolving an ambiguous or obscure provision of the law;
or
(b) confirming or displacing the apparent meaning of the
law; or
(c) finding the meaning of the law when its apparent
meaning leads to a result that is manifestly absurd or is
unreasonable; or
(d) finding the meaning of the law in any other case.
31 Interpretation of human rights
(1) International law, and the judgments of foreign and
international courts and tribunals, relevant to a human right
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! may be considered in interpreting the human right.
(2) In deciding whether material mentioned in subsection (1) or
any other material should be considered, and the weight to
be given to the material, the following matters must be taken
into account:
(a) the desirability of being able to rely on the ordinary
meaning of this Act, having regard to its purpose and its
provisions read in the context of the Act as a whole;
(b) the undesirability of prolonging proceedings without
compensating advantage;
(c) the accessibility of the material to the public.
Note The matters to be taken into account under this subsection are
consistent with those required to be taken into account under
the Legislation Act, s 141 (2).
(3) For subsection (2) (c), material in the ACT legislation register
is taken to be accessible to the public.”
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
260. The United Nations Human Rights Committee has upheld laws
that restrict the right to freedom of expression where the restrictions
related to the interests of other persons or to those of the community
as a whole. 30
261. The application of section 16 of the Human Rights Act is limited
by the provision of section 28, which states:
“28 Human rights may be limited
Human rights may be subject only to reasonable limits set
by Territory laws that can be demonstrably justified in a free
and democratic society.” 31
30 Human Rights Commissioner’s submission (1 May 2006), paragraphs [26-29].
31 The current version of section 28 is as follows:
262. I have set out in footnote 31 the current version of section 28.
Subsection 28(1) is the same as that in the 2005 version of the Act.
Subsection 28(2) is a later addition, which helpfully sets out the
factors that must be considered. I am of the view that these factors
are relevant also to consider in relation to section 28 as it stood in
2005. Relevantly, I note that, in relation to subsection 28(2), the
explanatory statement for the Human Rights Amendment Bill 2007
(which became the Human Rights Amendment Act 2008) states that
“Section 28(2) is modelled on Section 7 of the Victorian
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006 and
section 36 of the Bill of Rights in the Constitution of the Republic
of South Africa 1996. Its intention is to provide guidance in the
application of the general limitation clause in section 28(1) and
to reduce its uncertainty.”
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
Limit to freedom of expression and other rights
263. The Human Rights Commissioner submits (at paragraph [30] of
the submission of 1 May 2006) that:
“Whether a limitation on the right to freedom of expression is
reasonable depends upon whether it is proportionate to achieve
a legitimate aim. This requires that the limitation be necessary
and rationally connected to the objective; the least restrictive
means reasonably available to accomplish the object; and not
have a disproportionately severe effect on the person to whom it
applies.”
264. The Discrimination Act is specific and definitional and Australian
authorities exist to assist interpretation and application of the Act.
I agree with the Human Rights Commissioner’s submission that
“restrictions imposed upon the freedom of expression set out “in Must !!! Must!Il AustLI AustLi
section 16 of the Human Rights Act by sections 20(c) and 66 of the
“28 Human rights may be limited
(1) Human rights may be subject only to reasonable limits set by Territory
laws that can be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society.
(2) In deciding whether a limit is reasonable, all relevant factors must be
considered, including the following:
(a) the nature of the right affected;
(b) the importance of the purpose of the limitation;
(c) the nature and extent of the limitation;
(d) the relationship between the limitation and its purpose;
(e) any less restrictive means reasonably available to achieve the
purpose the limitation seeks to achieve.”
Discrimination Act “satisfy both the requirements of” section 28 of the
Human Rights Act and Article 19(3) of the ICCPR.
265. With regard to the defence in section 66(2)(c) of the
Discrimination Act, the Human Rights Commissioner submits that it is
“relevantly identical” to section 18D(b) of the Racial Discrimination Act
1975 (Cth) and, hence, the interpretation of the latter section by the
Full Federal Court in Toben v Jones [2003] FCAFC 137 applies. This
case concerned the publication of material on the internet, which the
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity found to be ‘racially vilificatory
of Jewish people”. The Human Rights Commissioner argues that “The
Full Court construed the defence narrowly, requiring an analysis of
the nature and purpose of the material actually published”, and that
that interpretation is “entirely consistent with the application of the
principle of proportionality”.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust!
266. Taking this argument along with the Applicant’s position that
onerous standards are to be satisfied before a complainant can prove
a claim of vilification, may give rise to an argument that the right to
freedom of expression is already limited “proportionately” in
section 66(1) of the Discrimination Act and the defence in
section 66(2)(c) should be interpreted consistently with that limited
right. Such an argument would diminish the value of the right to
freedom of expression in its application to the defence.
267. I am of the view that the defence provision, like any other
provision, also should be interpreted consistently with human rights
in accordance with section 30 of the Human Rights Act and that in
that exercise, each relevant right has their role subject to limitation
the proportionality test warranted in section 28 of the Human Rights
Act. In doing so, the section 66(2)(c) defence “may be seen as defining
the limits of the proscription” in section 66(1) and “not as free speech
exception to it” (see, Bropho v Human Rights & Equal Opportunity Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Commission [2004] FCAFC 16 at paragraph [16]). The Federal Court
construed the defence broadly rather than narrowly. French J [at
paragraph 94] said that the freedom the defence provision (i.e. section
18D) of the Racial Discrimination Act 1975 (Cth) protects is broadly
construed.]
268. I observe that the approach in Toben v Jones is different to the
approach I have taken to the defence in section 66(2)(c) of the
Discrimination Act. The Federal Court considered the defence in
section 18D(b) of the Commonwealth Act in the context of an offence
under section 18C of the Act.32
32 Section 18C, Racial Discrimination Act 1975 (Cth):
Offensive behaviour because of race, colour or national or ethnic origin
(1) It is unlawful for a person to do an act, otherwise than in private, if:
269. Section 18D of the Commonwealth Act is as follows:
“18D Exemptions
Section 18C does not render unlawful anything said or done
reasonably and in good faith:
(a) in the performance, exhibition or distribution of an
artistic work; or
(b) in the course of any statement, publication,
discussion or debate made or held for any genuine
academic, artistic or scientific purpose or any other
genuine purpose in the public interest; or
(c) in making or publishing:
(i) a fair and accurate report of any event or
JAustII AustLII AustLII Aust! matter of public interest; or
(a) the act is reasonably likely, in all the circumstances, to offend,
insult, humiliate or intimidate another person or a group of
people; and
tLI
(b) the act is done because of the race, colour or national or
ethnic origin of the other person or of some or all of the
people in the group.
Note: Subsection (1) makes certain acts unlawful. Section 46P of the Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986 allows people to make
complaints to the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission about
unlawful acts. However, an unlawful act is not necessarily a criminal offence.
Section 26 says that this Act does not make it an offence to do an act that is
unlawful because of this Part, unless Part IV expressly says that the act is an
offence.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), an act is taken not to be done in Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
private if it:
(a) causes words, sounds, images or writing to be communicated
to the public; or
(b) is done in a public place; or
(c) is done in the sight or hearing of people who are in a public
place.
(3) In this section:
"public place" includes any place to which the public have access as of right or by
invitation, whether express or implied and whether or not a charge is made for
admission to the place.”
(ii) a fair comment on any event or matter of
public interest if the comment is an
expression of a genuine belief held by the
person making the comment.”
270. In the words of Carr J in Tobens v Jones,
“acts done in public which are objectively likely to offend,
insult, humiliate or intimidate and which are done because of
race, colour or national or ethnic origin are likely to incite
other persons to racial hatred or discrimination or to
constitute acts of racial hatred or discrimination. In my
view, the Convention (that is, International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination) can be seen to
be directed not only at acts of racial discrimination and hatred,
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! but also to deterring public expressions of offensive racial
prejudice which might lead to acts of racial hatred and
discrimination (words in italics added).” [at paragraph 19]
271. Even though the words of the Commonwealth section 18C and
section 66(1) of the Discrimination Act appear to differ, the reference of
Carr J that the Commonwealth provision covers “incitement to hatred”
would make the reasoning of the Federal Court in Toben’s relevant to
consider in relation to matters arising under section 66(1).
272. However, there are differences too between the circumstances in
the Toben v Jones and the matter before me. In Toben’s, the
published document was held to be ‘deliberately provocative and
inflammatory’ as ‘contrived to smear’ Jews and as containing
reference to ‘paint Jews in a bad light’. Hence, the tenor of the
document was taken to be designed to “smear, hurt, offend, insult and
humiliate Jews”.33 In the face of the strong evidence on the motive of
the publisher, the Federal Court had to consider the defence in Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
Commonwealth section 18D(b) narrowly, thereby not accepting that
the publication was in “good faith”.
273. In the matter before this Tribunal, as I have found earlier, the
Respondent acted in the honest belief that it was promoting a debate
on an issue of public interest and was supported by the right to
freedom of expression. The Respondent also asserted that it would
not allow publication if it was against law. Had there been a
deliberate design on the part of the Respondent to vilify homosexuals,
it would have warranted me to be strict in the application of the
defence in section 66(2)(c) by interpreting it narrowly.
274. Even though by way of the act of unlawful vilification the right
to reputation restricted the Respondent’s right to freedom of
33 Toben v Jones, at [161] and [163].
expression, yet, the right to freedom of expression still has a
significant role in relation to the defence. In particular, the element of
‘reasonableness and honesty” would be enlivened by that right,
particularly so, when the defence provision expressly includes the
purpose of public interest and “discussion or debate about and
presentations of any matter”. Strict construction of the right to
freedom of expression in relation to section 66(2)(c) would not give full
force and effect to the defence.
275. For these reasons, I do not think it is appropriate to strictly
construe the defence under section 66(2)(c) in relation to the matter
before me. The Commissioner’s submission and further submission
helpfully inform this Tribunal on evidence about prevalent
homophobia in the society.
276. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! However, unlike sexuality vilification, racial vilification is readily
identifiable and will have more serious impact on those whose race is
affected, as is shown in the history. In the face of racial vilification, it
may be possible that the scope for the defence would become
narrowed, calling for a strict interpretation. The right to freedom of
expression would still have a role in that interpretation in the sense
whether its restriction in such circumstances would meet the
proportionality test in section 28 of the Human Rights Act.
PART 6 - THE COMMISSIONER’S ROLE TO INVESTIGATE A
COMPLAINT
Respondent’s contention
277. The Respondent submits that the Discrimination Commissioner
acted outside her jurisdiction by investigating this complaint and by
referring this complaint to the Tribunal.
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
278. The Respondent’s contention is that the Commissioner did not
make a preliminary determination about her jurisdiction, and that
without any further reference to, and submissions from, the
Respondent, and without according natural justice, the Commissioner
proceeded to determine and uphold the complaint.
279. The Respondent submits that “it is appropriate that the
Tribunal give” the Commissioner “some guidance not only as to the
general interpretation of the laws, but as to her duties and functions
under the Act”.
280. I do not agree that this Tribunal should accede to the
Respondent’s request. However, I will deal with the other aspects of
the Respondent’s submission in relation to the Commissioner’s role as
follows.
The basis for the Commissioner’s action
281. The Commissioner contends, on the basis of legislative
requirements setting out the function of her office, that the
Respondent’s claims with regard to the jurisdictional issues are
entirely misconceived. In her submission, the Commissioner has set
out clearly the legislative basis for her action.
282. The Discrimination Commissioner (according to the
Discrimination Act as it stood at the time the complaint was made to
her) was (and is, in her current designation) an independent statutory
office-holder. The Commissioner’s functions are set out in section 112
of the Act.
283. +LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! The Discrimination Act, like its counterparts in other Australian
jurisdictions, provides for a government agency to conciliate between
the parties to resolve a complaint. The anti-discrimination laws of
Australian jurisdictions do not provide for the right of “direct access to
a court or tribunal in order to enforce these laws”.34 They provide for a
two-stage enforcement process. The first stage is a complaint to a
designated government agency which has investigation powers and
can resolve a dispute by primary dispute resolution methods, such as
conciliation or mediation. If the complaint is not resolved by the
agency, the complainant may elect to go to a court or tribunal.
284. Under section 72 of the Discrimination Act, a complaint relating
to an unlawful act under the Act may be lodged with the
Commissioner by an aggrieved person or his or her agent.
285. The Applicant lodged his complaint with the Discrimination
Commissioner on 24 August 2005. The Commissioner proceeded
with her investigatory role under section 73 of the Act. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
286. Section 73 of the Act provides:
“73 Investigation
The commissioner must investigate a complaint made in
accordance with section 72 to decide—
(a) whether the complaint can be dealt with under this Act;
and
(b) whether the commissioner may decline the complaint;
and
(c) if the complaint can be dealt with and the commissioner
does not decline it—whether resolution of the complaint
by conciliation between the parties is reasonably likely.”
34 Rees N, Lindsay K, and Rice, S, Australian anti-discrimination law, Text, Cases
and Materials (The Federation Press, Annandale, 2008), p.7 [1.3.2].
287. Section 73(b) refers to whether the Commissioner may decline a
complaint. The power for such action is conferred by section 81 of the
Act, which, inter alia, provides:
“81 Declining complaints
(1) If, because of the investigation of a complaint
lodged under section 72, the commissioner decides
that a relevant ground exists in relation to the
complaint, the commissioner must decline the
complaint.
(2) For subsection (1), the following are relevant
grounds:
(a) the complaint is frivolous, vexatious,
misconceived or lacking in substance or was
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! not made in good faith;
(b) a more appropriate remedy in relation to the
matter complained of is reasonably available
to the complainant;
(c) the complaint relates to an act, or the last in
a series of acts, that took place more than 12
months before the lodgment of the complaint;
(d) the matter complained of is not unlawful
under part 3, part 5 or part 7 or section 66;
(e) the matter complained of has already been
adequately dealt with by the commissioner or
tribunal;
(f) the matter complained of has already been
adequately dealt with otherwise than by the
commissioner or tribunal;
(g) the complainant does not want the complaint Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
investigated;
(h) having regard to the complaint and any other
relevant matter before the commissioner, in
the opinion of the commissioner it is not
necessary to pursue the complaint.
(3) If the commissioner declines a complaint under
subsection (1), the commissioner must give written
notice of the decision to the parties no later than 60
days after the lodgment of the complaint.
(4) A notice to a complainant under subsection (3)
must include a statement to the effect that—
(a) if, within 60 days after the date of the notice,
the complainant does not require the
commissioner to refer the complaint to the
tribunal, the commissioner will dismiss the
complaint and take no further action in
relation to it; and
(b) should the complaint be so dismissed, the
complainant may apply to the tribunal for the
complaint to be heard if exceptional
circumstances prevented him or her from
requiring the referral.
Commissioner and Respondent
288. The Commissioner did not consider that any relevant ground
existed upon which she should decline the complaint. The
Commissioner notified the Respondent about the complaint and
sought its response. The Respondent was also advised that the
Commissioner would also consider anything the Respondent wish to
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! put forward on whether the Commissioner should investigate the
complaint. In the meantime, the editor of the forum published an
article in the Canberra Times, purportedly on 24 September 2005
referring to this complaint. As the Respondent’s response was
overdue, the Commissioner, in her letter of 7 October 2005 (T
document – 11) stated that the ACT Human Rights Office (that was,
the Commissioner’s office) operates under principles of natural justice
and asked whether the Respondent wished the Commissioner to
regard the article as the formal response.
289. In his email sent on 26 September 2005, the editor of the forum
denied discrimination and briefly set out the process he followed to
publish posts in the forum. He admitted the publication of the article,
but it is not clear whether as a response. He disputed that there was
material capable of invoking the Commissioner’s jurisdiction and
stated that he thought that the matter should be dismissed. He also
referred, in the general sense, to the Respondent’s right to be heard
and expected an interim determination in writing. Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
290. In his later email to the Senior Conciliator in the ACT Human
Rights Office, dated 4 October 2005, the editor disputed the
Commissioner’s jurisdiction and sought the dismissal of the matter.
M y conclusion
291. I find that the Commissioner had rightly proceeded to
investigate the complaint. She decided that the complaint raised the
issue of unlawful discrimination on the ground of sexuality. As the
resolution of the complaint by conciliation was unlikely she
proceeded, in accordance with sections 86 and 87 of the Act, to refer it
to this Tribunal, with the consent of the Applicant - which was the
correct procedure.
292. As regards the issue of natural justice in relation to the
Commissioner’s investigation, my views are as follows. Even in the
administrative review process, there is no absolute right to oral
hearing and whether written submissions would be enough would
depend on the context.35 It is evident from the Commissioner’s
decision that she had enough material to conduct her investigation
and not to dismiss the complaint under section 81. I do not agree
that there was denial of natural justice to the Respondent in the
Commissioner’s investigation process.
293. The Commissioner was not obliged to make a preliminary
determination about her jurisdiction to investigate a complaint. As
submitted by the Human Rights Commissioner,
“In the absence of any of the criteria set out in s81, the
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! Discrimination Commissioner has a statutory duty to
investigate a complaint within the meaning of s72. There is no
statutory basis for a ‘jurisdictional decision’ by the
Discrimination Commissioner of the type asserted by the
Respondent.”
294. I am of the view that the Commissioner acted within her
jurisdiction under the Discrimination Act, by investigating the
Applicant’s complaint and, in view of the unlikelihood of conciliation,
referring the complaint to this Tribunal. In view of what I have stated
above, I do not agree with the Respondent’s submission in relation to
the role of the Commissioner with respect to this matter.
PART 7 - GENERAL COMMENTS
295. There were undoubtedly harsh comments made regarding the
Applicant’s sexuality and about homosexuality in general. It is
certainly deplorable that people will stop to making such base Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
comments. In reading a transcript of the posts from the forum, I will
add that base comments flowed both ways in the argument and it
seems to me that the main protagonist, with regard to the comments
against which the Applicant complains, was himself also the recipient
of very harsh comments.
296. The publishing of these comments did not amount to
discrimination. There was no unfavourable treatment of the
Applicant, nor was there the imposition of a condition or requirement
that disadvantaged the Applicant.
297. The publishing of these comments did amount to unlawful
vilification. The four prong test set out in the legislation was met.
35 Lane, W B, Young S M, Administrative Law in Australia (Law Book Co, Sydney,
2007), p.121.
However, the Respondent was able to meet the defence in section
66(2)(c) of the Discrimination Act.
298. What I will say, with respect to the Respondent’s conduct in
publishing comments on the forum, is that this on-line public forum
was accessible to the community and beyond.
299. There are similar Have Your Say forums in the Age and the BBC
websites. They are very useful for people to express their views on a
number of issues of their interest. In this computer age, I envisage
this media to become more and more powerful in linking people from
numerous places and of various backgrounds, strengthening their
“free” thinking and right to freedom of opinion and expression. Of
course, these rights will need to be moderated in such forums by the
need to respect other rights and abide by laws. This calls for a high
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! level of responsibility on the part of the editors of such forums.
300. The Respondent should be encouraged to re-open the on-line
forum as a beneficial tool for the public to communicate in relation to
matters of public interest. In short, it is a modern device for sharing
of views and it would be sad if technical legal complaints or litigation
on rights force its demise.
301. My recommendation to the Respondent is - frame and publish
similar terms and conditions as in Have Your Say forums conducted
by popular and respected media, and display a prominent notice
about what will not be published. I also recommend that the service
of a responsible dedicated staff be made available to quickly peruse
postings and edit or reject expressions that are contrary to law. I will
be happy if this decision serves as a guide for the Respondent to
address these recommendations.
302. I would like to reiterate that the warning referred to paragraph Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
128 above should be part of the process.
303. I also welcome the editor’s statement in his article of
24 September 2005 that “ will be tightly monitored to be sure
that it hurts the feelings of nobody”.
304. In paragraph 6 of the Applicant’s submission, reference is made
to the rules for other, similar, forums to the one the Respondent
provided. In support of my recommendations, I will reproduce some
extracts from those forums, as examples.
305. An extract of the Age Forum Rules is as follows
(http://www.theage.com.au/articles/2004/02/11/1076388427066.ht
ml) :
“theage.com.au welcomes your participation in our Online
Forums.
In order to keep these forums enjoyable and interesting for all of
our users, we ask simply that you follow these minimal rules.
Before posting messages in the forum, you should read this
page. If you don't understand the Forum Rules, you may find
that your messages are deleted. While theage.com.au values free
speech, we also value the responsibilities that come with this
freedom. To ensure that all participants enjoy and benefit from
the discussion forum, we have established standards of
participation.
1. You will not knowingly post content that violates the
copyright, trademark, patent or other intellectual property
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust! right (including moral rights) of any third party. Likewise,
you may not post content that is libelous, defamatory, obscene,
abusive, that violates a third party's right to privacy, that
otherwise violates any applicable local, state, national or
international law, or that is otherwise inappropriate. You will
indemnify theage.com.au, its employees, agents, and affiliates
from any and all claims and/or damages resulting from any
claim brought by any third party relating to content you have
posted, and further agree to abide by the f2 Network's Terms of
Use.
2. You understand and agree that theage.com.au will moderate
the Online Forums at its own discretion and reserves the right
to delete, edit, bar access, or otherwise alter content that it
deems inappropriate for any reason whatever without consent.
3…………………..
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
4. The forums are for text only…………………..
5. You acknowledge and agree that you use and/or rely on
any information obtained through the discussion forums at
your own risk. theage.com.au is not in any manner
endorsing the content of the forums and cannot and will not
vouch for its reliability. the.age.com.au cannot accept
responsibility for the actions of any participants in the forum
discussions.
6. For any content that you post, you hereby grant to
theage.com.au the royalty-free, irrevocable, perpetual, exclusive
and fully sublicensable license to use, reproduce, modify, adapt,
publish, translate, create derivative works from, distribute,
perform and display such content in whole or in part, world-
wide and to incorporate it in other works, in any form, media or
technology now known or later developed.
7. theage.com.au staff assume that you have read the Forum
Rules and will not take ignorance of any rules as an excuse for
not following any rules, policies, and guidelines outlined here
or at any other f2 Network site. “
306. Some rules of the BBC Have Your Say webpage
(http://www.bbc.co.uk/terms/) are as follows:
“3. You agree to use bbc.co.uk only for lawful purposes,
and in a way that does not infringe the rights of, restrict
or inhibit anyone else's use and enjoyment of bbc.co.uk.
Prohibited behaviour includes harassing or causing
distress or inconvenience to any person, transmitting
obscene or offensive content or disrupting the normal flow
of dialogue within bbc.co.uk.”
“14. You agree to use bbc.co.uk communities (including
tLIIAust message boards) in accordance with the following
Community Rules. These apply across all bbc.co.uk
community sites and services. You should, however, read the
local house rules of the particular site or service you're
using, as there may be some local variations to these
Community Rules.
(i) About your posts:
 Contributions must be civil and tasteful.
 No disruptive, offensive or abusive behaviour:
contributions must be constructive and polite, not mean-
spirited or contributed with the intention of causing -Il AustLI AustLI AustLI
trouble.
 No unlawful or objectionable content: unlawful, harassing,
defamatory, abusive, threatening, harmful, obscene,
profane, sexually oriented, racially offensive or otherwise
objectionable material is not acceptable.
 Be patient: users of all ages and abilities may be taking
part in the relevant bbc.co.uk community.
 No spamming or off-topic material: we don't allow the
submission of the same or very similar contributions many
times. Please don't re-submit your contribution to more
than one discussion, or contribute off-topic material in
subject-specific areas.
 No advertising or promoting.
 No spoilers: material which contains plot developments
which haven't been transmitted on UK television will be
deleted unless submitted in a designated 'spoilers' area or
marked as a 'spoiler'.
 Contributions containing languages other than English
may be removed unless allowed in the relevant local house
rules.
 No impersonation.
 No inappropriate (e.g. vulgar, offensive etc) user names.
 URLs (web site addresses) can only be posted if allowed
under any relevant local house rules.
 Deliberate misuse of the complaints facility is not
permitted. If you persist in doing this, action may be taken
against your account.”
PART 8 - REM EDY SOUGHT BY THE APPLICANT
307. The Applicant sought the remedy of public apology in relation to
his discrimination, and of public apology to the gay community in
relation to the vilification claim. He stated that he was not interested
in any personal compensation.
308. Section 102 (2) of the Discrimination Act provides for the types of
tLIIAus order the Tribunal may make if it is satisfied that an unlawful act
under the Act is established. If I found the Respondent liable for an
unlawful act, I would have ordered for the remedy sought, by acting
under section 102(2)(b)(ii) of the Act (see, Burns v Radio 2UE Sydney
Pty Ltd [2004] NSWADT 267). Under section 102(2(b)(ii), the Tribunal
may order a respondent “to perform any reasonable act or acts to
redress any loss or damage suffered by a person as a result of the
unlawful conduct by the respondent”.
309. I found that the Applicant’s discrimination claim was not
AUSEL !!
substantiated, hence, dismiss that claim under section 102(1)(a)(ii) of
the Discrimination Act. Although the claim for unlawful vilification of
gay community generally (not the Applicant per se) was substantiated
ASELII
under section 66(1) of the Act, the Respondent has established to the
satisfaction of this Tribunal the defence under section 66(2)(c) of the
Discrimination Act (namely, that its publications were a public act,
done reasonably and honestly, for purposes in the public interest,
including discussion or debate about and presentations of any
matter).
310. Therefore, this Tribunal is not awarding the remedy sought by
the Applicant. That does not preclude the Respondent taking any
steps to address concerns that the Applicant or the gay community
had or has about posts that they considered offensive to them.
I believe such approach would be welcome by the community.
311. I will be pleased if this decision encourages the Respondent to
re-commence the Have Your Say forum and to address the
recommendations I have made. This will enable rigorous expression
of opinions subject to a warning that readers of the forum may find
offensive materials and the decision to access them will be theirs.
+LIIAustLII AustLII AustLII Aust
Must!Il Aust !!! AustLII AustLi
AustLII AustLI
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
APPEARANCE DETAILS
FILE NO: DT 577/2005
APPEARANCE: APPLICANT: Ms Bernadette Boss,
+LILAustLII AustLII AUSALII Aust Counsel
RESPONDENT: Mr Jack Waterford
INTERVENER: Mr C S Ward,
[HUM AN RIGHTS Counsel
COMMISSIONER]
TRIBUNAL MEMBER: MR R J CAHILL, PRESIDENT
DATES OF HEARING: 3 February 2006, 3 March 2006,
28 March 2006, 5 May 2006, and
11 July 2006
DATE OF DECISION: 31 July 2009
Must!Il Aust!Il AustLI AustLi